---
title: "L2.1 Determinants (part 3) :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L2.1 Determinants (part 3) :: IITM Online Degree

L2.1 Determinants (part 3)

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the maths 2 component  of the online BSc course on data science.  00:21Today s video is a continuation of the  determinants topic that we have been studying. So,  00:29this is part three of that same topic. So, let us recall quickly what we did in the  00:33previous so far in this topic. So, we have defined  for a 1 by 1 matrix, that the determinant of the  00:40matrix a is just the number a. And then we  have seen that for an n by n matrix, the  00:46determinant is defined inductively. So, we did the  definition explicitly for 2 by 2 and 3 by 3.  00:52And then I showed by for 4 by 4  how I can use a 3 by 3 definition  00:56and then you we said that, in general, we use  the minors or co-factors, corresponding to the  01:04first row in order to define the determinant.  So, that means if so the idea is if you know  01:12how to determine to define the determinant for n  minus 1 by n minus 1 matrix, then you can use this  01:20procedure to get it for the n by n matrix. So, just to recall, the i, j-th minor is the  01:27determinant of the submatrix formed by deleting  the i-th row and j-th columns, so you have  01:32n rows and n columns, you delete the i-th  row and the j-th column. And then you are  01:37left with an n minus 1 by n minus 1 matrix.  And then you take the determinant of that.  01:44And the i, j-th cofactor is minus 1 to the  power i plus j times the i, j-th minor.  01:57And just to recall again, this was the final  thing that we did in the previous video,  02:02we have seen that the determinant of a is  minus 1 to the power 1 plus j, a1j, M1j.  02:09So, this was given by what I called expansion  along the first row and then you can take this  02:16minus 1 to the power 1 plus j, inside along  with M1j and then you can replace it by C1j  02:24that is why we define the cofactors where  we can get rid of the science coming here.  02:30So, this is what we have studied so far. So,  why did we study the i, j-th minor or the i,  02:40j-th cofactor, because it is not occurred  so far. So, that is one of the things we  02:44will see in this video and we will also see  some other properties of the determinant.  02:50So, why did we define the i, j-th minor or the  i, j-th cofactor? So, the reason is because  02:59we had a formula for the  determinant in fact the definition  03:03in terms of expanding for any row or  any sorry with respect to the first row.  03:10And now what we are going to see is that you can  actually do this with any row or any column.  03:15And there is nothing very special about the  first row. So, this is called expansion along  03:23any row or column. So, here is what happens  when we do expansion along the i-th row.  03:32So, in that case we can write the expression  for the determinant as the sum of the  03:40i, j-th entry of a times the i. j-th minor  multiplied by minus 1 to the power i plus j.  03:52So, remember, when i was 1 that was the  definition. So, when i was 1, we had minus  03:581 to the power 1 plus j a1j, M1j. So, now what  we are saying is we can replace that 1 by i and  04:07the formula works equally well. So, the expansion  along the first row was the definition that we are  04:13going to use and what we are saying is, it does  not matter whether you use one there or any other  04:19row, you can expand along any other row. And the fact is, you can even use a column  04:29to do the same thing. So, you can expand  along any column. So, here, notice that  04:37the j was what was varying and the i was  fixed. So, this is expansion along the i-th row  04:51and this is the expansion. So, now  the j is fixed and the i is varying.  05:04Here i is varying and j is fixed. So, that is expansion along the j-th column.  05:13So, maybe let us do an explicit expression,  let us write down one explicit expression here.  05:20So, suppose I have a 3 by 3 matrix, and  I want to expand along the second row.  05:27So, what is this term telling me? So,  this is expansion along second row.  05:33So, this is saying what you have to do is, you  have to take minus 1 to the power. So, now i is 2  05:40and now j varies, so minus 1 to the power 2 plus  1 times a21 times the 2 1-th cofactor sorry the 2  05:491-th minor plus minus 1 to the power 2 plus 2, a22  times the 22-th minor plus minus 1 to the power  06:032 plus 3 a23 times the 23-th minor, my bad this  should be 22 so that is the expression.  06:15So, if you write it out, concretely,  this is minus a21 times determinant of  06:25so you have to drop the second row and  first column. So, you get a12, a13, a32, a33  06:39plus a22 times determinant of a11, a13,  a31, a33 minus a23 times determinant of  06:47a11, a12, a31, a32. So, I hope it is clear what  we mean by expanding along the i-th row this is  07:17an example of how to do this, you can do this  for an n by n matrix also. It is correct.  07:23The proof is slightly involved I mean, it  is not hard, but it involves manipulation of  07:30a lot of expressions. So, if you like your  algebra, I will suggest you go ahead. And  07:35let me do maybe a similar example for expansion  along the second row sorry second column. So,  07:41this is expansion along second column. So, what this is saying is that this is minus 1 to  07:46the power 1 plus 2, a12 times determinant of a21,  a23, a31, a33 plus minus 1 to the power 2 plus 2  07:54a22 times  08:14similar determinant, I will encourage you to  write this down plus minus 1 to the power 2 plus 3  08:26sorry this was what the second column, so  my bad, this is a32 times the determinant of  08:33the corresponding matrix you obtain  namely so that is a minor.  08:39So, this is what we mean by expansion along  any row or column. And it is a fact that the  08:46determinant can be computed in any of these  ways. And it remains the same, so there is no  08:52nothing special about the first row of the matrix.  That is how we define it. So, now, that we have  08:59seen that the determinant can be computed in terms  of any row or column meaning by expanding along  09:07any row or column, we see that in particular,  there is nothing special about the first row.  09:13And we see that the expression that  we are getting, there is some kind of  09:16symmetry about them. But of course, with  some negative signs thrown in and so on.  09:23So, keeping that in mind, let us, now look at some  properties of the determinant. So, we already saw  09:31in the first video, that the determinant of  a product is the product of determinants and  09:40we could do various operations on matrices and  the determinant either remain the same or change  09:47sign. So, we need all of those 2 by 2 and 3 by  3 matrices. So, let us see now what happens for  09:54the general case. So, I will make these statements  but I will not really prove too many of these.  10:05So, the first property that we want to look  at is the product. So, the same thing that  10:11was earlier that we saw earlier still holds,  namely that a determinant of a product is  10:18the product of determinants. So, what  we mean by that is determinant of AB  10:24is determinant of A times determinant of B. So, we explicitly check this, when they were of  10:36size 2 by 2 and I said you can try to check this  for 3 by 3. If you did, you must have seen that  10:43the expression start becoming rather complicated,  it is not difficult, but you have to be careful  10:49with your algebra. And so you can imagine  that for 3 by 3, sorry, beyond 3 by 3, if you  11:01work it out in terms of the explicit  expressions, it going to be slightly hard.  11:09So, I will not, we will not really get  into the proof of the statement. But  11:17we have seen it for 2 by 2, and hopefully we  have taken for 3 by 3. So, this is believable.  11:23So, let us use this instead and derive some  interesting formulae. So, the first thing that  11:30we can do is we can ask, if you take the power  of a matrix of a square matrix of course,  11:41namely you do A square A cube A to  the power 4, A to power n in general,  11:47then what happens to the determinant. And what this identity tells you is that  11:55you can take this power out, so determinant  of A to the power n is determinant of  12:03A to the power n. The second thing that you  get out of this identity is if you take the  12:12determinant of the inverse, then that is just  the reciprocal of the determinant of A. So, I can  12:20take this more fancy language as  determinant of A to the power minus 1.  12:28So, the proof of this is exactly the same as  we did for the 2 by 2 and 3 by 3 case, I will  12:34suggest that you go back and  look at it. Another very useful  12:41formula is that when you get  determinant of P inverse AP, so you  12:48have a matrix P, you take its inverse. So, A and  P are both of size square matrices of size n by n,  12:56and P has an inverse. So, take determinant of P inverse AP, then  13:04you can use this formula and what  we derive just above to get that  13:11the determinant is the same as the determinant  of A. And then another thing to note  13:18very easy fact. Remember that we saw that  the product of two matrices may not be  13:27even defined, if you do not, if you take the  opposite order and even if it is, they may be of  13:33completely different size and even if they are of  the same size, AB and DA may not be the same  13:40But the determinant must be the same because  the determinant is the product of determinants.  13:47This is of course remember if A and  B are of square matrices of size n  13:52by n and the final identity maybe one can  write down. So, determinant of A transpose A.  14:06So, maybe before I even do this, I would  ask, what is determinant of A transpose? So,  14:11determinant of A transpose. So, now given  that, we can expand along any row or column,  14:20so for A transpose instead of  expanding along the first row,  14:24we expand along the first column. So expand along the first column,  14:32so I say expand along first column. So, I  strongly suggest you do this and if you do that,  14:47the expression you are going to get will allow  you to conclude that this is determinant of  14:54A. So, I will leave this to you so along with so  I will have I should use this through this plus  15:06what I will call induction. Namely, assume that this formula is correct for  15:12n minus 1 by n minus 1 matrices, that d transpose  of a matrix has the same determinant, then expand  15:19along the first column and in the minors, remember  there are determinants of n minus 1 by n minus  15:241 matrices. So, think of those as transpose  of something, and you will see that you can  15:34equate these two expressions. So, once we  know this determinant of A transpose is  15:44determinant of A, so determinant of A transpose  A is determinant of A squared, this might not  15:51be very seem very interesting right now,  but maybe at some later point, you might  15:58find expressions of this type coming up. So, this long list of interesting  16:06observations, let us go on to another property.  So, again, we have check this property for  16:142 by 2 and 3 by 3 matrices or other I have checked  it for 2 by 2 and I hope you have solve 3 by 3.  16:21So, switching two rows or columns  changes the sign of the determinant.  16:30So, what do we mean by  16:34switching two rows or columns, let me  recall on that was, so if A is like this,  16:41this is the i-th row, this is the j-th row. So, this is the ai1, ai2, ain, this is aj1, aj2,  16:58ajn. So, we will switch these two rows to get this  new matrix A tilde. So, now it is i-th row will be  17:10aj1, aj2, ajn this is i-th row of A tilde and the  j-th row will be ai1, ai2 up to ain this is the  17:14j-th row. So, we have switched these two column  rows, and everything else in A tilde is exactly  17:31the same as it was for A, all other entries are  exactly the same. So, then determinant of A tilde  17:41is minus determinant of A, how do we  get this? So, the again the idea is  17:51expand along the i-th row and then use  induction. So, expand along i-th row  18:11and use induction. So, if you do that,  you will see a minus sign coming up.  18:29Let us, move on to the next property that we want  to discuss, I should have said in the previous  18:36slide that similarly, if you interchange columns  you get the same result. So, adding multiples of a  18:46row to another row leaves the determinant  unchanged. So, what does this mean?  18:51So, here is A, which was like in the previous  slide and what is A tilde. So, let us say I add  19:01t times the j-th row to the i-th row. So, then  here I get the ai1 plus t times aj1, ai2 plus  19:07t times aj2 and so on ain plus t times ajn and  the j-th row remains the same aj1, aj2, ajn.  19:26So, the only thing that has changed is the is the  i-th row and what happens in that case, so the  19:38claim is the determinant of A tilde  is the same as the determinant of A.  19:50So, again, one has to prove this. So, the  proof is so one way of proving this is to  20:01expand along the i-th row and then you will  get two different expressions one as this  20:07determinant away and the other is determinant of  a matrix, which has two rows which are the same  20:19and then one will have to prove that  is 0. So, that is how you get this.  20:27So, one can do this also for columns. So,  for columns, let us say if I want to add  20:32the k-th column to the l-th, sorry t times l-th  column to the k-th column, then we will get we  20:44want k plus t times a1l, a2k plus t times a2l and  so on ank plus t times anl this is the new k-th  20:59column and the same thing will have work the  determinant of A double tilde is determinant of A.  21:11So, adding multiples of a columns to another  column leaves the determinant unchanged.  21:20So, then another property. So, again,  we have seen this for 2 by 2 and I  21:26left to you to check for 3 by 3, if you  multiply a particular row by a constant t,  21:31then the determinant gets multiplied by t. So,  the same thing holds for columns, if you multiply  21:40a column by t, then the determinant gets  multiplied by t. So, what is this thing,  21:46so you have your matrix A and let us say in  A tilde you multiply the i-th row by t.  21:52So, we have tai1 tai2 and so on tain everything  else is the same. So, then what you do is you  22:04expand using the i-th row so, if you expand  using ith row you get t times ai1, maybe  22:17for that there is a minus sign which I should  have included, anyways sign I (())(22:21) forget.  22:25So, determinant of A tilde, so expansion along  the i-th row gives us summation minus 1 to the  22:30power i plus j j runs from 1 through n.  So, maybe let me do this proof so that  22:37you get an idea of how to prove such things. So, t times aij Mij but now you can take t out and  22:56so you get minus 1 to the power i plus j  22:59aij, Mij. So, now so you have to be very careful  here because when you write down the minus that  23:08with respect to a particular matrix, so let  me put this tilde here. So, this is the minor  23:14the i, j-th minor of the matrix at A tilde.  So, this is i, j-th minor of the matrix A tilde  23:22but if you delete i-th row and whatever column  then the remaining matrix remember it will may  23:31have the same matrix. So, m tilde i, j for  this particular row i is the same as Mij.  23:38So, this is just t times summation j is 1 through  n minus 1 to the power i plus j aij Mij where this  23:47is i, j-th minor corresponding to the matrix A  and now, this is exactly the expression for the  23:54determinant of A. So, we have actually proved  this. So, what is upshot? The upshot is that  24:00if you multiply a particular row by t then in the  determinant it comes out, the same thing holds for  24:06columns. So, I will suggest that you check this  so there you will have to expand along columns.  24:14So, I will also put in a warning  here because this is something  24:19that often students make  mistakes with so warning.  24:29If you multiply the entire matrix  by a constant, remember that we have  24:36studied multiplying matrices by scalars. So,  scalar multiplication matrices that means you  24:43multiply each entry of that matrix  by that scalar. So, if you do that,  24:49and this is an n by n matrix, so, just to  keep track of that this is an n by n matrix,  24:55then this is like multiplying not just one  particular row or one particular column by t,  25:01but every row or every column by t. So, you will pick up a t in the determinant  25:09from each row. So, what you will get this  t to the power n times determinant of A.  25:17What is this n? This n is exactly  25:26the size of A remaining the number of rows or  number of columns in A. So, t to the power n  25:32times determinant of A, you will not get t times  determinant of A. So, be careful of this property,  25:38it says you multiply a row by a constant t,  then that t comes out in the determinant. If  25:44you multiply the entire matrix by t, then t  to the power n comes out of the determinant.  25:51This is something students often make  mistakes, so be careful with this.  25:56So finally, let me end with some  computational tips. So, if you have  26:04a zero row or a zero column in a matrix, then  the determinant is 0. How do you get this? We  26:10expand along that particular row or column.  The determinant of a matrix in which one row or  26:16column is a linear combination of the  other rows, respectively columns is 0.  26:22Why is that? Because you can remember,  we can add multiples of a row to another  26:29row and the determinant remains unchanged. So, you keep adding the correct expressions of  26:35the other rows to that particular row and you  make it 0. So, once you make it 0, remember,  26:41the determinant remained unchanged and then you  have a zero row or column. And that is how you  26:46get the determinant to 0. So, the second property  we will be using later on. So, we will come back  26:52to this if you did not understand this. The third one is what we just saw scalar  26:56multiplication of a row by a constant t  multiplies the determinant by t. And the  27:03fourth is a general sort of tip, while computing  the determinant, you can choose to compute it  27:09using whatever row or column is most convenient.  For example, as we saw in the first thing here,  27:17we used that row or column which is 0. So, this is a general statement or it may be  27:26of use so what are we done in this video, we have  seen how to compute determinants. First of all,  27:32we define determinants for square matrices  and then we saw that you can compute them  27:38using expansion along any row or column  in terms of minors and then we use that to  27:49look at some other properties. So, most  importantly, determinant of a product is  27:54product of determinants they are very  important. So, keep this in mind.  27:57And then we also saw that if you  do some particular operations,  28:01namely adding two rows meaning adding  a multiple of one row to another,  28:05or multiplying a particular row by a constant, or  swapping rows, we saw how the determinant behaves.  28:14So, that is it for now. In the next video, we  will see how to use determinants to compute  28:21solutions to inverses sorry solutions  to systems of linear equations.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.