---
title: "L2.2 Cramer's Rule :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L2.2 Cramer's Rule :: IITM Online Degree

L2.2 Cramer's Rule

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the maths 2 component of  the online BSC degree on Data Science. In today's  00:21video we are going to look at Cramer's Rule  which employs the determinant in order to find  00:28the solutions of a system of linear equations,  when the coefficient matrix is invertible.  00:37Let us go on and do an example.  00:41So, let us look at this linear system, so  4x1 minus 3x2 is 11 and 6x1 plus 5x2 is 7.  00:52So, let us recall what was the matrix  representation. So, that is Ax is b, so  00:58the matrix A is given by the coefficients, so 4,  minus 3, 6, 5 and b is the constants on the right,  01:07so it is a column vector or column matrix  11, 7 and x is the unknowns x1, x2.  01:16So, this it is easy to compute  this solution, it has a unique  01:20solution x1 is 2 and x2 is minus 1. Let us quickly go through how, so we can multiply  01:29the first one by 3 to get 12x1 minus 9x2 is 33,  01:36we can multiply the second one by 2 to get  12x1 plus 10x2 is 14 and then we subtract  01:46let us say the first one from the second  one, so in that case we get 19x2 is  01:56so what should we get, so 14 minus 33, so that  is minus 19, that tells us x2 is minus 1 and then  02:12we can substitute in one of these expressions  and get that x1 is 2, one of these equations  02:18and get that x1 is 2. So, we can easily  check that this is a unique solution.  02:27So, now let us do something slightly different  and reinterpret this using determinants.  02:35So, here is the same example and here  is how we will apply Cramer s rule.  02:41So, we look at the coefficient matrix A,  so that was 6, minus 3, sorry, 4, minus 3,  02:466 and 5. Let us compute the determinant  of A, so if we do that that is 4 times 5  02:57minus negative 3 times 6 so that is 20 plus  18 which is 38, let us keep that value in  03:09mind. So, the determinant of A is 38. So, replace the first column of A by the  03:16column vector b and we will call that matrix  A subscript x1 because the first column are  03:25the coefficients corresponding to x1 in  the two equations. So, A subscript x1 is  03:3211, minus 3, 7, 5. So, we have replaced the 4, 6  over here by 11, 7. Replace the second column of  03:43A by the column vector b and call it x2, Ax2, so  A subscript x2, so we are doing the same thing  03:50for the second column. So, now the first  03:54column is the same as the first column of A and  the second column is replaced by 11, 7 so we get  04:014, 11, 6, 7 let us say subscript x2, let us  calculate determinant of Ax1, so you can do this,  04:09this is 11 times 5 minus negative  3 times 7 so that works out to 76  04:20and then let us calculate the determinant of  x2, sorry, Ax2, A subscript x2. So, if you do  04:27that that is 4 times 7 minus 11 times 6 that is  minus 38, so remember that the determinant of  04:36A was calculated to be 38. So, let us  keep this in mind 38, 76 and minus 38.  04:46So, now what do we do? So Cramer's rule will say, let us  04:51calculate determinant of A subscript x1 by  determinant of A and determinant of A subscript x2  04:59by determinant of A. So, let us do that, so  this is 76 by 38 and this is minus 38 by 38  05:19and these are exactly the solutions. So, x1 is  05:302, remember that is what we got  in the first slide and x2 is  05:36minus 1 which is exactly what this is.  So, at least in this example we have  05:43this strange method using determinants and  it gives us the solutions that we require,  05:52that we should have got, not required. So, let us study what is Cramer's rule in general,  06:00so this is for when the coefficient  matrix is an invertible matrix,  06:06so what do you mean by invertible?  Invertible means that the inverse exists.  06:13So, consider the following system of linear  equations of 2 variables a11x1 plus a12x2 is b1,  06:21a21x1 plus a22x2 is b2. So, the matrix  representation here is a11, a12, a21, a22  06:32and b is b1 the column vector b, b1, b2. And the assumption here is that the matrix  06:38A is invertible, meaning its inverse exists and  because its inverse exists, remember that in the  06:49previous video with determinants we have seen that  determinant of A inverse is 1 by determinant of A  06:55which in particular means that determinant of  A is non-zero, so 1 by determinant of A exists.  07:04So, let us define these 2 matrices as in the  previous example. So, we replace the first column  07:12by the vector b1, b2 and we call that new matrix  A subscript x1 and we replace the second column  07:19by the column vector b and we call  that new matrix A subscript x2.  07:29And then Cramer's rule says the solution of  the system of equations and I am saying the  07:35which means it is a unique solution, in  two variables, so this is determinant of A  07:43subscript x1 by determinant of A, note  that this division makes sense because its  07:50invertible and x2 is determinant of A subscript x2  by determinant of A, again makes sense and we know  07:59explicitly what these expressions are, for 2 by 2  matrices the determinant is easy to compute.  08:05So this is the numerator on for the  first expression is b1 a22 minus a12 b2  08:15and the numerator for the second  expression is a11 b2 minus b1 a21  08:21and the determinant of the matrix  A is a11 a22 minus a21 a22.  08:30So, that is the algorithm you have to  follow for Cramer's rule to find the  08:38solutions of a system of equations where the  coefficient matrix A has non-zero determinant.  08:49We can make this more general,  so let us do a 3 by 3, see  08:54Cramer's rule for 3 by 3 matrices. So, again  here the coefficient matrix must be invertible,  09:01so the determinant of A must be non-zero because  we divide by the determinant. So, here is  09:07the system of linear equations in three variables,  so recall that its matrix representation is Ax is  09:14b, where A is the coefficient matrix and b is  this column vector of constants b1, b2, b3.  09:23So, in that case what is Cramer's rule?  So, we will have to define these new  09:30matrices, again 3 by 3 matrices, so A subscript  x1 is where you replace the first column of  09:38A by the column vector b, A subscript x2 is  where you replace the second column vector,  09:44sorry, the second column of A by b and A subscript  x3 is where you replace the third column vector,  09:54third column of A by b. And then  how do we get the solution?  10:03So, the solution meaning again its unique of  the system of equations that we saw is x1 is  10:10determinant of A subscript x1 by determinant of A,  x2 is determinant of A subscript x2 by determinant  10:17of A and x3 is determinant of A subscript x3 by  determinant of A. Again very important is that  10:24the determinant here must be non-zero, otherwise  of course, we cannot divide and assuming that A  10:32has an inverse ensures this or explicitly we  can say that determinant of A is non-zero.  10:39So, how did we define these A subscript  x1, A subscript x2, A subscript x3?  10:46So, in the first one we the first column  was replaced, in the second one the second  10:50column was replaced and in the third one  the third column was replaced. So, these  10:55and the notations should tell you which columns  are replaced because x1 means the coefficients  11:00corresponding to x1 that is the column which  is replaced, so those were a11, a21 and a31.  11:07Similarly, for x2 and x3. So, this is Cramer's  rule for 3 by 3 matrices or for a system of  11:17linear equations in three variables,  maybe let us do a quick example.  11:26So, consider this system of equations where  the coefficient matrix, so I am instead of  11:34writing down the system I am writing down  the coefficient matrix and the constants.  11:39So, the coefficient matrix is 1, 0, 3, 0, 2, 5, 4,  3, 1 and the constants are 0, 2 and 1 respectively  11:50for the three equations. So, to use Cramer s  rule first let us look at the determinant.  11:57So, the determinant of A, so we will have to  compute this, so the determinant is minus 37,  12:06so I encourage you to compute this. So, since  it is non-zero we can apply Cramer s rule.  12:16So, let us follow the next steps  in the procedure for Cramer's rule.  12:20So, we have to compute these matrices A  subscript x1, A subscript x2 and A subscript x3.  12:27So, how do we compute these matrices? We  replace the corresponding columns by the  12:36column b. so, here we get 0, 2, 1 so b, this is  b and the other things remain same here we get  12:460, 2, 1 in the second, in place of the  second column and here we get 0, 2,  12:511 in place of the third column. So, these are our matrices  12:59A subscript x1, A subscript x2 and A subscript  x3 and then we compute their determinants, so the  13:05determinant of A subscript x1 is 12, you can check  this. So, here we have first row has two 0s, so  13:11this is an easy computation similarly, for A  subscript x2 you can check this is minus 27 and A  13:18subscript x3 the determinant is minus 4. And then by Cramer's rule  13:25we get that the solution  to this system of equations  13:29is x1 is minus 12 by 37, x2 is 27 by 37 and  x3 is 4 by 37. So, I will encourage you to  13:40substitute these x1, x2, x3 and check that  indeed this is the solution and you can,  13:49you know do a usual method of solving equations  and check that indeed this is the solution.  13:55So, finally let us end with Cramer's  rule for the n by n, so now if you have  14:02n systems in, a system of n linear equations in n  unknowns. So, remember here that we should have,  14:11the coefficient matrix has to be square first  of all, so we need n equations in n unknowns,  14:17this will not work otherwise and the  second thing we need here is that  14:23the coefficient matrix is invertible or  that the determinant is non-zero.  14:32So, this is the general system of equations, A  is this matrix of coefficients aij, a11, a12,  14:41a etcetera and then b is the constant, so column  vector with b1, b2, bn, then you define Axi that  14:50is A subscript xi, this is a new n by n matrix and  how do we obtain this? We obtain this by for the  15:01i-th column you substitute the, you replace  it by the column vector b. So, if you do that  15:12then you compute its determinant and then the  solution to the system of linear equations.  15:20So, Cramer's rule states that it is given by xi is  determinant of A subscript xi by determinant of A,  15:28so we compute for each i. So, x1 is determinant  of A subscript x1 by determinant of A, x2 is  15:31determinant of A subscript x2 by determinant  of A and so on up till xn is determinant of  15:39A subscript xn by determinant of A,  that is what Cramer's rule states.  15:47So, in Cramer's rule remember that we need, this  is very important n equations in n unknowns,  15:59that is when we can apply it and further we need  that the determinant of the coefficient matrix  16:05A is non-zero and then we can explicitly  work out what the solution is. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.