---
title: "L2.4 The echelon form :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L2.4 The echelon form :: IITM Online Degree

L2.4 The echelon form

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the maths 2 component of the online BSc course on Data Science.00:20In today's video we are going to talk about the echelon form. So, the Echelon form is00:26a particular form for a matrix and when the matrix is in this form, we can read off solutions00:32quite easily.00:33So, let us look at, let us recall first what is the system of linear equations. So, a general00:40system of m linear equations within n unknowns is like this a 1 1 x 1 plus a 1 2 x 2 plus00:50a 1 n x n is b 1 and then all the way up to a m 1 x 1 plus a m 2 x 2 plus a m n x n is00:59bm. So, there are n unknowns, which is the xi s and there are m equations. So, for each01:08equation we have a constant on the right-hand side. So, the i th equation that constant01:13is bi.01:14We have seen earlier that, we can write this in a vector form in a matrix form that is,01:20so we consider the m by n matrix A, which is a matrix of coefficients and x is the vector01:27of unknowns x1, x2, xn and b is the vector of constants, the column matrix b1, b2, bm01:36And then what is the solution?01:41So, solution is an assignment of values for x so that the equations are satisfied. So,01:46when you put xi is equal to some particular number and for each xi I put in a number and01:53when the equation holds true, that means, indeed when you compute a 1 1 times whatever01:59value you have substituted for x1 plus a 1 2 times whatever value of substitute for x202:03plus a 1 n times whatever value you have substituted for xn is b1 and the same thing happens for02:10all the other equations, then we say that those particular values that we have substituted02:17constitute a solution for x1, x2, xn.02:22So, let us look at the example of this matrix. So, we have A is the matrix with first row02:301,0,2, and second row 0,1,3. So, let us see how we can find out solutions for this. So,02:37here, I am going to write down what the corresponding equations are, of course, here I have not02:45mentioned what the constants are. So, let us take the equation A x equals 0. So, this02:53is called a homogeneous system, which we will study later. So, the corresponding equations02:58are going to be x1 plus 2 x3 is 0 and x2 plus 3 x3 is 0.03:09So, now, typically, what do we do, we try to manipulate around and find values for x1,03:15x2, x3. If you look at this, this is not really much we can do to manipulate this and the03:20reason is that we can have many, many solutions. So, how do we find solutions? So, you can03:30see from these equations that x1 is minus 2 x3 and x2 is minus 3 x3 and that is all03:41that we need, in order to get a solution. So, whenever we have, we substitute a value03:46for x1, which is negative 2 times the value for x3 and x2, which is negative 3 times the03:52value for x3, we get a solution.03:54So, you can put x3 equals some constant c and then let us say I take x3 equals 5. So,04:03if x3 is 5, then to get my solution, what I can do is I can put x1 is minus 10 and x204:11is minus 15 and indeed, the one possible solution then is x is equal to minus 10, minus 15,04:23and 5, so 5 was an arbitrary choice for x3, I could have used some other number. So, for04:29example, if I use x3 is c, then I get x1 is minus 2c and x2 is minus 3c.04:41So really, the set of solutions for this, we can write this as minus 2c, minus 3c, and04:53c where c can be any real number. So, we can have c is 5, c is 20, c is 1 million, whatever04:59you want and all of these, for each value of c we will get a solution. So, we have infinitely05:06many solutions, that is the first thing we observed and not only that, we in fact see05:12that we can get these all these solutions in a very particular way, we can really do05:17this for any b.05:19So, if you carefully observe what we did, instead of Ax is 0, if we had Ax is b, we05:26can obtain solutions for Ax is b as well, maybe I will describe this very fast. So,05:33for Ax is b, what do we do, for Ax is b, what, what we do is we write down again, the same05:40set of equations, the equations are x1 plus 2 x3 is b1 and x2 plus 3 x3 is b2. And from05:52here, we can move x3 to the other side and then whatever value of x3 we have, we can06:00read off the values of x1 and x2 and each time we will get a solution. So again, we06:04have an infinite number of solutions.06:06So, there was something particularly easy about this matrix, we could read off all the06:15solutions not only to Ax is 0, but Ax is b any b. So, matrices of this form, have a particular,06:22there is a name for this form, it is called the Row echelon form and that is what we are06:26going to study in this video.06:28So, when it is said to be in Row echelon form. So, it is said to be in Row echelon form,06:36if the first non-zero element in each row called the leading entry is 1. So, whenever06:42you have a row and it is a non-zero row, so you could have 0 rows of course, if it is06:48a non-zero row, then there will be a first element which is non-zero as you move from06:53left to right. And the first such 1 has to be 1.07:00The next axiom for the Row echelon form is that each leading entry is in a column, which07:12is to the right of the leading entry in the previous row. So, like you saw in the previous07:18example, in the first row, the 1 was in the 1 1 th place, in the second row, the 1 was07:24in the 2 2 th place. So, if you consider the second column and you ask, or rather, you07:38consider the second row and you ask where is the leading entry, which is the first 107:44that you have? It is in the second column and that is to the right of the leading entry07:50in the previous column, which was in the first row.07:52So, broadly speaking, you have to go downwards and to the right, like this, the 1s have to08:00be like this. Let us look at the next requirement. So, rows with all zero elements, so if there08:07are rows, which are entirely 0, then they must lie at the bottom of the matrix, they08:12must come at the end, so they must be below those rows, which have a non-zero element.08:17So, these 3 are the requirements for a matrix to be in Row echelon form and then, if you08:28want the matrix to have one further property, which is the following, that for a non-zero08:37row, if you look at the leading entry, you look at that first one that you have and then08:42you look at the column in which the entire column. So, already the requirement that the08:48second requirement that each leading entry in the column to the right, tells you that08:52below this 1 everything is 0, you cannot have anything non-zero below this 1. But you could08:58have non-zero entries above this 1. So, we call it, we say it is in the reduced Row echelon09:04form, if the entries above that leading 1 are 0.09:09So, the previous example that we had, which was 1 0 2, and 0 1 3, this is indeed in reduced09:23Row echelon form. So, first of all, it is in Row echelon form. Let us check that. So,09:29the first non-zero element of each row is a 1 indeed, that is the case because what09:34is the first non-zero element in each row, well this is the first non-zero element, this09:38is the first non-zero element and both of them are 1s.09:42And then the second requirement is that if you have a leading entry, you will look at09:48the column and all the leading entries in rows before that must be before it, so this09:58one over here this is in the second column, so if you look at the previous row, the 110:05is in the first column. So, that is okay, that is exactly what we want. So, this is10:15satisfied and this is satisfied and rows with all zero elements, well, there is no such10:20row, so this is satisfied.10:21And now let us talk about reduced Row echelon form. So, it says, if you take these ones,10:27then the entire column other than that 1 is 0. Indeed, below this, the first 1 there is10:32a 0 and above the second 1, there is a 0, so that is also satisfied. So, we have seen10:42that in our previous example, indeed, satisfied this. So, it was not the reduced Row echelon10:47form and we could read off the solutions to Ax equals b very easily.10:55So, let us do another example. So, here is a matrix, which is in Row echelon form. So,11:03the first in each non-zero n row. So, all 3 rows are non-zero, the first non-zero term11:08is indeed 1 is that the case indeed, that is the case. 1, 1 and 1 and then whenever11:15you have a leading term, so you have this 1 over here, this is in the fourth column,11:22so the 1s which are in the previous columns, so the 1 in the previous column, it is before11:28this it is in the third column. So, that matches up and then the 1 above this is in the first11:36column, so that matches up.11:38So, your 1s have to sort of go diagonally, but like this not, there cannot be 1 below11:481, 1 to the below and left, it has to be below and right. So, this is in reduced echelon11:58form. So, let us ask, this is in Row echelon form? Is it in reduced Row echelon form? So,12:09for it to be in the reduced Row echelon form? For the leading terms, we have to look at12:15the columns and ask, are all the other entries 0? Well, that is certainly not the case over12:20here because here is a non-zero entry, here is a non-zero entry, here is a non-zero entry,12:26so this is not in reduced Row echelon form, this is in Row echelon form. So, let us look12:33at another example.12:36And we can do the same analysis for the second example. In fact, these matrices look very12:41similar and there is a way of going from one to the other, which we are going to study12:47in the next video. So, let us look at this matrix over here. Is this in Row echelon form?12:53Well, certainly all the leading terms are 1, all the 1s which are leading terms come12:59to the right of the ones which are in the previous rows and there is no non-zero row,13:06so the third axiom is requirement is satisfied easily.13:09But this has a further property that not only is it in Row echelon form, it is in the reduced13:16Row echelon form, because now, these entries over here are indeed zeros and that is a requirement13:22for reduced row echelon form. So, this matrix is in row echelon form, this matrix, the first13:29one is in row echelon form. But it is not in reduced row echelon form 13:50and this is in reduced row echelon form. And of course, if it is in reduced row echelon13:56form, it is already in row echelon form because reduced is a stronger requirement.14:04So, let us do the analysis that we did in the example that we saw earlier in this video,14:13so let us ask what is the set of solutions for this? So, if we want, let us say Ax is14:230, A r ref x is 0, what do we do, we write down again the system of equations. So, 114:31plus 2 x 2 is 0, or maybe let us do b, let us do the general case, let us do b. So, b,14:40so this is b1 and then x3 is b2 and then x4 is b 3. So, now I want the set of solutions14:51for this. So, already we know what is x3 and x4, x3 and x4 are fixed they are b3 and b414:58and for x1, what do I do? Well, I can do what we did before.15:01So, I can say x 1 is 1 minus 2 x2 and then if I choose a value for x2, automatically,15:09I can get a solution by substituting that value in this equation and getting and substituting15:15x1 to be that particular number. So, if I take x2 to be constant some c, then I can15:22get x1 to be b1 minus 2 c. So, this gives me a solution. So, what is the solution? The15:30solution is x is b1 minus 2c, c, b2, and b3, this is my solution for Ax is equal to b and15:46now whatever value of c you substitute, will give you a solution.15:50So, if you take c to be 0, for example, then your solution will be b1, 0, b2, b3. If you15:56take c to be 5, let us say then your solution will be b1 minus 10, 5, b2, b3. So, you can16:04see that I can read off solutions for these matrices in this way and not just some solutions,16:13we can in fact get read off all solutions. This is the only way we can get solutions16:17for these matrices and this is how, this is the use of the row echelon form or the reduced16:24row echelon form.16:25So, solutions of Ax is b when A is in reduced Row echelon form. We did not do one small16:31case in the examples, but I will state it here before I talk about the general situation.16:37So, let Ax is b be a system of linear equations and suppose A is in reduced row echelon form.16:45Suppose for some i, the i'th row of A is a 0 row, but bi is non-zero. So, the i'th row16:53of A is 0, but the corresponding constant bi is not 0, then this system has no solution.17:04You can think of for a second and if you still cannot see why then here is the reason. So,17:12we can write down the corresponding system of equations and if you write down the system17:16of equations, what will the i th equation look like, the i th equation will look like17:200 times x1 plus 0 times x2 plus 0 times xn because the entire i th row of A is 0, so17:28the constants, the coefficients there are 0.17:32But on the right-hand side, you have bi, so we want that 0 times x1 plus 0 times x2 plus17:370 times x n is bi. Now the left-hand side, it does not matter what the xi s are, what17:46values you put inside xi s, the left-hand side will always evaluate to be 0. So, if17:54b is non-zero, then there is no hope of getting a solution. Whatever values of x1, x2, xn17:59and you take this equation cannot be satisfied.18:02So, there is no possible solution for this system of equations. So, the key point is18:09that there if row of A is 0, then the corresponding constant bi must be 0, in order for there18:20to be a solution, otherwise there cannot be a solution, there will not be a solution,18:25we have seen why? So now, let us look at the case where such a thing does not happen. So,18:33whenever we have 0 rows in A then the corresponding constants bi are 0.18:40So, solutions again. So, suppose we have Ax is b and A is in the reduced Row echelon form.18:47So, assume that for every zero row of A, the corresponding entry of b is also 0. So, that18:53means if the i'th row of A is 0, then b is also 0, then we can apply the procedure that19:00we saw in the examples that we did before. So, we are going to give some names here,19:05so that we make this procedure very algorithmic.19:09So, if the i'th column has the leading entry of some row there are going to be some columns,19:15which have leading entries. In our first example of where we had 1 0 2, and 0 1 3, the leading19:22entries were in the first column and the second column respectively. So, then we will call19:29xi as a dependent variable. So, in that first example, since the leading entries were in19:33columns 1 and 2, x1 and x2 are going to be dependent variables.19:40And if the i'th column does not have the leading entry of some row, we call x i an independent19:45variable. So, all the other variables are independent variables. So, in that first example,19:51the independent variable is x3. In the second example, the independent variables where x2.20:00So, let us maybe write that down. So, we had 1, 0, 2, 0, 1, 3. So, here x1 and x2 are dependent20:21and x3 is independent. And in the second example, well, we had I think 1 2 0 0, and then 0 020:371 0, and then 0 0 0 1. So, here are the leading columns the leading entries are in columns20:471, 3 and 4 respectively.20:51So, x1, x3, x4 are dependent variables and x2 is an independent variable and you saw21:02this reflected in the solutions, why we are calling it independent. So, if you remember21:06how we solve this in the first one, we took x3 to be, fixed x3 to be some arbitrary c21:14and then from there we got what is x1 and x2. And similarly, in the 2nd example, we21:19fixed x2 to be some arbitrary c and then x1, x3, and x4 for fixed, so that is what we are21:25going to do.21:28Assign arbitrary values to the independent variables and then for a dependent variable,21:34what happens? There is a unique equation in which it occurs. So, if you look at the first21:41example, 1 0 2 and 0 1 3, x1 occurs exactly in 1 equation, it occurs in no other equation.21:49Similarly, for the second example, if you look at x1 it occurs in only 1 equation, x321:54occurs and only 1 equation, x4 occurs in only 1 equation.21:58So, from those equations, we can find out their values. So, all other variables in that22:06equation are independent variables. That is why that is a power of the reduced row echelon22:12form. Because all the other column with a leading 1, the entries, all the other entries22:21are 0, so no dependent variables can occur together. In a single equation, you will have22:27only 1 dependent variable, if at all. So, all the other equations, variable in that22:34equation are independent variables and we have assigned values to them. So, from there,22:39I can move them to the right-hand side and get the value of the dependent variable and22:49then if we put all these together the obtained values for xi give a solution to the system.22:54And, in fact, every solution can be obtained in this way, that is what we saw in the 223:01examples that we did. So, the conclusion here is, if A is in the reduced row echelon form,23:07this very easy procedure, it is an algorithm. Let us recall what it is, you find out what23:12are the leading ones, the corresponding columns, the column numbers will tell you what are23:21the dependent variables, all the other ones are the independent variables.23:26For the independent variables, you assign arbitrary values and then calculate the values23:32of the dependent variables from the corresponding equations. So, this procedure provides us23:39with all the solutions of Ax is equals b. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.