---
title: "L2.6 The Gaussian elimination method :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L2.6 The Gaussian elimination method :: IITM Online Degree

L2.6 The Gaussian elimination method

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the maths 2 component of the online B.Sc. program. In this video00:19we are going to talk about a process called the Gaussian elimination method. Using this00:27method, we will be able to do a lot of things. So, in particular, we will be able to find00:32the solutions to any system of linear equations, in a very fixed algorithmic manner. And we00:40can also use it to find the determinant of a square matrix which we kind of saw last00:47time. And we can also use it to find the inverse of a square matrix which is invertible. So,00:53let us quickly recall, what was our, what we have seen before.00:59So, we have seen the following methods to find the solutions of a system of linear equations,01:05Ax equals b. Namely, we have seen if A is invertible, then the solution is unique. And01:10it is given by A inverse b. And we can find the solution by either Cramer's rule, that01:18was the first method we saw. And the other method we saw was to actually compute A inverse.01:25To do this, we find the adjugate matrix and then we find A inverse b.01:32So, these are slightly cumbersome methods, because they involve a lot of determinant01:37calculations. And finding determinants is a very resource intensive process. So, you01:45have to do a lot of computation to find determinants. And here, we have to find not just one, but01:51several determinants, and that is how these processes work. So, compared to this, remember01:57that if A is in what we call the reduced row echelon form, then we can find the solution02:03of, of such a system very easily.02:10So, if you, if Ax is equal equals b is the system that we are solving, and if A is in02:15reduced echelon form, then we have the following procedure to find the solutions and note that,02:26there can be many solutions. Now, because it A is no longer a square matrix, it could02:30be a rectangular matrix. So, you find the dependent variables. So, these are the ones02:35which correspond to the leading entries. So, the there is a 1 in the nonzero rows, which02:41is, which appears at the beginning of the row, the first entry of the, first nonzero02:47entry of that row looked at from the left, that is a leading term.02:51So, the column corresponding to that, that column, the corresponding variable. So, if02:58the ith column is a leading entry, then xi is an, is a dependent variable. And if the03:04ith column does not have a leading entry, that, that corresponding variable is an independent03:10variable. So, all those columns which do not have leading ones, those correspond to independent03:18variables. And then how do we find our solutions, you plug in any value that you want for the03:23independent variables, and you back calculate to find the values of the dependent variable.03:33And note that each dependent variable will appears in a unique equation that is the advantage03:38of the reduced row echelon form. And you can use that to back calculate and find the value03:45of a dependent variable. And then all such values for every choice of values of the independent03:56variables, we get a solution of our system Ax equals b. Of course, you have to when before04:03we do this, remember, this is very important that if there is a 0 row in your reduced row04:10echelon form, and the corresponding entry in b is nonzero, then this system cannot have04:18a solution.04:20This was one of the things we observed and we will use this as you go ahead. So, this04:24tells you all the possible situations. So, it tells you whether there is a solution,04:29if there is a solution, it enlists all of them. And we are going to make use of this04:35technique. So, we saw this two videos ago and we are going to make use of technique04:41along with what we saw in the previous video where we took an arbitrary matrix and we used04:49row operations. So, elementary row operations to reduce it to reduced row echelon form.04:56So, we are going to put both these two together. And we are going to solve an arbitrary system05:02of equations Ax equals b05:04So, what are the contents of this video, we will study what is called the augmented system,05:09augmented matrix for a system of linear equations, we will study the Gaussian elimination method05:15to determine all solutions of a system of linear equations. And here, our system may05:23not have the same number of variables as equations. So, in other words, your A could be a rectangular05:31matrix, it need not be a square matrix. And finally, we will use this also, this is very05:36brief to compute the inverse. So, we will use this technique also to compute the inverse05:41of a, of an invertible matrix, of course, which is square.05:44So, what is the augmented matrix? So, let Ax equals b be a linear system of equations.05:49So, A is an m by n matrix. So, you have m rows and n columns, so remember that the n05:58columns correspond to the n variables, and the m rows correspond to the m equations.06:04And b is as a result, the m by one column vector, or column matrix of constants, which06:10appears to the right. So, any such equation, we have these three matrices, Ax and b, A06:21is m by n, x is a column vector a column matrix of size n by 1 and b is a column vector of06:29size m by 1.06:31So, we form what is called the augmented matrix of the system. So, this is a new matrix, and06:37it is of size m by n plus 1. So, there is a small typo here, namely that our n plus06:451 should be in the brackets. So, m by n plus 1. So, the first n columns are the columns06:54of A, and the last column is b. So, this is, this is how I define the augmented matrix07:02of this system. And we have a notation for the augmented matrix, it is A to slash b.07:11So, this is to remember that the first n columns are coming from A and the last column is coming07:19from b, can we put this vertical line, so this is just notation. And how are we going07:25to write this augmented matrix? So, we will write this augmented matrix as follows. So,07:31if my coefficients for the equation are a 1 1 a 1 2 etcetera. So, then I have a 1 107:41a 1 2 all the way up to a 1 n, I put this vertical line here, a 2 1 a 2 2 upto a 2 n.07:52And then I have a m 1, a m 2 up to a m n.08:01So now, this is my matrix A remember, so, A came in the first n columns, that is what08:08the definition says. And in the last column, I have my vector b1, b2, bm. So, this is the08:20augmented matrix for the system. So, it is a matrix with m rows, same number of rows08:25as number of equations, and n plus 1 columns, the n columns coming from the coefficients08:32and the last column coming from the constants. So, what do we do with this augmented matrix?08:40So, for the augmented matrix, let us, let us first do an example maybe, of an augmented08:46matrix. So, here is my system of equations, 3x 1 plus 2x 2 plus x 3x 4, 6 x 1, 2 x 2 x08:552, 7x 2 plus x 3x 4 is 8. So, A is the matrix 3 2 1 1; 1 1 0 0; 0 7 1 1. You might remember09:07this from the previous video. So, we have already done the operation of row reduction09:11on this matrix. And b is the column vector of the constants, which are appearing on the09:19right, so that is 6 2 and 8.09:21So, what is the augmented matrix? So, you just take these two, and you put them together,09:27but you put a line in the middle. So, this line is just to be, it is not sort of part09:34of the matrix, but it is something that you put to remember that on one side, you have09:38coefficients and on the other side, you have the constants.09:43So, what do we do with the augmented matrix? So, this is what the Gaussian, where the Gaussian09:49elimination method starts. So, you have a system of linear equations, Ax equals b, and09:55Gaussian elimination is going to tell you how to get all the solutions of this. So,09:59it will use these two things. First, it will use the augmented matrix. And second, it will10:04use the technique of reducing to the row echelon form that we have reduced row echelon form10:11that we studied in the previous video.10:13And then it will, it will use that for, for matrix and reduced row echelon form. If I10:18have something like Rx equals c, then I can find all the solutions. This is exactly the10:25technique. So, let us go through the steps. So, form the augmented matrix. So, we just10:31saw what that was. Perform the same operations on this augmented matrix, that were used to10:37bring A into reduced row echelon form.10:39So, we know how to bring any matrix into reduced row echelon form. So, if you take the matrix10:44A, there is a series of steps and it is an algorithm, using which you can put it into10:53reduced row echelon form, so you have to use elementary row transfer, row operations. So,10:59you use the same operations on this new matrix that you used on A in order to put a into11:09reduced row echelon form.11:10So, note that this new matrix that you have, need not be in reduced row echelon form. And11:15indeed, that is the point, if it is not in reduced row echelon form at the end, then11:21something special is going to happen. And if it is in reduced row echelon form at the11:27end, then something else is going to happen. So, let R be the sub matrix of the obtained11:34matrix of the first n columns. So, you look at the so after you do this process on A slash11:42b, so the augmented matrix, you apply all these elementary row operations.11:46So, in the end, you will get another new matrix, which is again with m rows and n plus 1 columns.11:54So, you look at the first n columns, and that matrix you call R. And let c be the sub matrix11:59of the obtain matrix consisting of the last column. So, the last column consists of c.12:04And to keep track again of the first ten and the last column, we will put a vertical line12:09between them. So, we write the obtained matrix as R vertical line c.12:19And now this is the important part, notice that R is in the reduced row echelon form,12:24it must be, because you took A and you applied all the row operations on A, which we used12:33on A slash b, that we used to put A into reduced row echelon form. So indeed, R is exactly12:39the matrix that you got, after you applied all those operations to reduce it into reduced12:45row echelon form. So, R is exactly the, that matrix.12:50So, what is next? So the, this is the main point, this is the crucial point, which is12:59why the entire method works, these solutions of Ax equals b are precisely the solutions13:06of Rx equals c. So, what have we done, we have taken an arbitrary system of linear equations13:13Ax equals b, we have performed some operations on this, on the matrices occurring there,13:21we have found two new matrices R, which is of size m by n and c, which is of size m by13:291, where R is reduced row echelon form. And when we take the corresponding system of linear13:36equations Rx equals c, the set of solutions of Rx equals c is exactly the same as the13:42set of solutions of a Ax equals b.13:45Now, well, if you think a little about what is happening, you can see that we are already13:54done here. So, from here, I can finish off how to find the solutions Ax equals b.13:58Let us list out the procedure entirely, form the corresponding system of linear equations14:03Rx equals c, find all the solutions of Rx equals c and hence of Ax equals b. So, if14:11I, as we observed, the solutions of Ax equals b are exactly the same as the solutions of14:17Rx equals c. That was the punchline of the previous slide. And now so if we find all14:24the solutions of Rx equals c, then I know all the solutions of Ax equals b.14:29And how do I find the solutions of Rx equal c? Well, R is in reduced row echelon form.14:36So, I have a concrete procedure to find these. So, you find the independent variables and14:42the dependent variables and then you put the independent variables to arbitrary values,14:47and then you back calculate to find the values of the dependent variables. We have done examples14:51of this as well. We recalled this right at the beginning of this video. So, we have a14:59very concrete procedure now to, to find the solutions of Ax equals b.15:07So, let us do an example. So, you might find this, this is the same example that we saw15:15earlier, where we put the system of linear equations into the, we wrote down the augmented15:23matrix of the system of linear equations. So, now let us perform the Gaussian elimination15:26method on that same example. Now, if you look at this matrix on the left, just the matrix,15:37just this part, the A part.15:39So, if you look at that A part, then that A part is exactly the matrix that we used15:46in the previous video, which we use the which we completely computed, what was the reduced15:54row echelon form for. And so you have to use those same steps over here. So, we can do,16:01we will do a fresh, of course. So, we will do that a fresh, so the first step is, you16:10get a 1 in the 1 1 place, because you start with the first column, and then you try to16:16get a 1 in that 1 1 place.16:18So, you do R 1 by 3. And then you do R2 to minus R1, to cancel all the 0s below. So,16:26this is what you get. And now notice what is happening here, we are not performing these16:31operations only on the A part, we are performing it on the entire matrix. So, in that includes16:37the b part, it includes the column b. So, when we went from the first step, in the first16:43step, the R1 by 3 was also applied on the column b. So, you have to apply it on the16:51entire row, not just the row of A but the entire row.16:54In the second step, we did R2 minus R1. And in R2 minus R1, we got a 0 in the second place17:05of the last column. So, your performance on the entire second row, not just the A part17:14of the matrix. Let us continue. So, the next thing we do is we multiply the second row17:21by 3 in order to bring a 1 over there. Then we cancel out, we cancel out the 0 below that17:331, by doing R3 minus 7 R2. Keep noticing what is happening to the last column, you are playing17:40all this on the last column as well. And then finally, we have to get a 1 in the third row17:48now. So, we divide by 8. And notice that the 8 in the last column, also got divided by17:558, and we got a 1.17:57So, let us write down this matrix again. And maybe now I will finish this calculation.18:01So, this is already, the matrix on the left is already in row echelon form. So, now I18:07am going to reduce it to the reduced row echelon form. So, in order to do that, what do I do?18:14So, I do R2 plus R3, and R1 minus one third R3. So, what do I get? So, this is still 118:320 0 two third 1 0 then 0 0 1. And, well, we have slightly lucky, we also get a 0 0 1 here.18:45And then let us see what happens here.18:48So, R2 plus R3 means I get a 1 in this place. So, I already have a 1 here. And then R1 minus18:54one third R3. So, 2 minus 1 third. So, that is 6 by 3 minus 1 third. So, that is 5 by19:063\. And in the next step, what do I get? I do the same thing for the second column. So,19:16I do R1 minus 2 third R2. So, if I do that, I get 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1. But something19:31may change here. So, R1 minus two third R2 means you would have five third minus two19:37third, so five third minus two third is 3 third, which is one, so 1 1 1.19:43And this is my final matrix. So, in terms of our notation, this is what I call R, and19:50this is what I call c. Now let us write down this corresponding equation. So, we have Rx19:56equals c. And now how do I find the solutions for this. So, we look at the independent and20:04the dependent variables. So, here there is three leading ones, namely column one, column20:09two, and column three. So, x1 x2 x3 are independent, sorry dependent variables.20:18And x4 is independent. So, let us put an arbitrary value for x4. So, substitute x4 equals c.20:28And now let us see what happens to the others. So, x1, actually, there is no choice, x1 is20:331, x2, again, there is no choice x2 is 1 if you write down the equation, and in the third20:38equation, we have x3 plus x4 equals 1, but we have put x4 equals c, that means x3 equals20:461 minus c. So, the set of solutions of Rx equals c, and hence, Ax equals b is vectors21:05of the form, so that is x1.21:06So, you can either write it as a vector or in or explicitly, maybe let me write it explicitly.21:14So, x1 is 1, x2 is 1, x3 is 1 minus c and x4 is c. And where c can take any choice,21:26we can have any number of c, so any real number, I can write the same set as in terms of a21:32vector as 1 1 1 minus c and c, where c belongs to R. So, we have determined all the solutions21:41of the system of equations, Ax equals b, where A was exactly that matrix that we started21:49with, in our first example.21:52So, maybe let us do another example. So, here we have x1 plus x2 plus x3 is 2, x2 minus21:573 x3 is 1, 2 x1 plus x2 plus 5 x 3 is 0. So, the matrix representation, so A is a square22:05matrix, 1 1 1, 0 1 minus 3, 2 1 5, and b is 2 1 0. So, the augmented matrix, you put A22:13and b beside each other, and put a vertical line across them. So, it is three rows and22:18four columns, where the fourth column is b, and the first three rows are A.22:21So, let us do this example, maybe explicitly. So, maybe let us write down the first step.22:32So, this is R3 minus 2 R1, why R3 minus 2R1, well, there is already a 1 in the 1 1-th position.22:39So, R3 minus 2 R1 cancels at 2 at the, in the first column. And note that we have also22:45applied this on the last column. So, the last column entry becomes minus 4. So, let us do22:54one more step. So, you have R3 plus R2.22:57Now, because once again, our so we want a 1 in the second column, in this part of the23:08matrix over here, which we already have. So, so I do not have to do anything to make that23:141\. And now I want to use that 1, and clear off the minus 1 below that. So, to do that,23:25we do R3 plus R2. And again, the entry in the third, the third entry here changes. So,23:34let us continue and finish off this example. So, well, this is actually already in row23:44echelon form.23:45So, now let us put it into reduced row echelon form, to put it into reduced row echelon form,23:50what do I have to do, I have to get rid of this 1 over here. So, let us do that, to do23:54that I have to do R2, sorry, R1 minus R2. So, I have 1 0 0 and then 0 1 0 and then 124:17minus, minus 3, that is 4, and then minus 3 and 0, and then 1 minus 1, which is 0. So,24:290 1 and minus 3, we could actually have skipped this step but I am doing it just because I24:37want to stick to the procedure.24:39So, this is in reduced row echelon form. So, this is our R, this is our c. So, let us write24:45down Rx equals c. So well, so R is is reduced row echelon form. So, I can read off all the24:53solutions. And now you have to be slightly careful and carefully observe the following.25:03Look at this last thing over here. So, you have a 0 row in the, on the left meaning in25:10R, you have a 0 row, but the corresponding constant is not 0.25:18So, as soon as that happens, what do we know? We know that this does not have solutions,25:33meaning there is no solution to this equation, maybe that is how I should write it. So, there25:37is no solution to this system. So, this system does not have solutions. And because this25:57system does not have solutions, neither does Ax equals b. So, therefore, Ax equals b does26:05not have solutions. And of course, what does Ax equals b, A is this matrix here 1 1 1 026:151 minus 3 2 1 5, and b was the column 2 1 0. Now, we wrote down the explicit system26:21in the previous slide. So, we have, we have shown an example where we can use this method26:29to also check when a system does not have any solution.26:36So, I hope both these examples are, have cleared up any residual doubts, I will just make a26:44comment before I move ahead, I need not have done this last step. Anytime in this procedure,26:49when you hit this kind of situation where you have a zero row, and the corresponding26:55entry in your, in your constants, on the other side of the vertical line is nonzero, we are27:05saying that in your, you have an equation of the form 0 times x1 plus 0 times x2 plus27:120 times x n is equal to something nonzero.27:15Of course, this cannot have a solution. And you can stop right there and say this does27:19not have any solutions. But if you feel, sort of uncomfortable with stopping in the middle,27:27and especially if you want to program this into a computer, then you might as well finish27:32the entire method. So, this is the power of the Gaussian elimination method, you can find27:40out all the solutions of a system of linear equations.27:43So, let us study a particular case, we have studied this in a previous video, namely the27:51homogeneous system of, system of linear equations. That means Ax equals 0, equals 0. So, remember27:57that for x equals 0, we always have a solution, namely, x equals 0. If you put each of your28:04variables to be 0, then certainly this system is solved. So, 0 is always a solution. So,28:10you cannot have a situation where there is no solution for such a system.28:17So, homogeneous system always has a solution. So this is called the trivial solution, the28:23solution Ax equals 0 is called the trivial solution. And of course, that also means that28:29the other solutions, so if you have a solution, which is not 0, meaning there is some xi,28:34which is not 0, then that is called a non trivial solution. So, for a homogeneous system,28:39there are only two different possibilities. One is that the 0 is the unique solution.28:44So, remember that 0 is always a solution, whatever happens. So, if there is a unique28:48solution, then it must be 0. So, 0 is a unique solution. That is one possibility.28:54The other possibility is that there are infinitely many solutions other than 0. And how do we,29:02how do we get this? Remember that if, if you have 29:11more than one solution, then you have infinitely many solutions. And why is that? That is because29:18if you have more than one solution, then the only way to get that, that situation is if29:26one of your variables is a, is an independent variable.29:30And as soon as you pick up an independent variable, you have an infinitely, you have29:34infinitely many solutions. That is what they say. The other way of thinking about this29:45is that suppose you have a solution, let us say, so you have Ax equals 0 and x1 equals29:59let us say w1, x2 equals w2, and so on xn equals wn is a solution, then so is x1 equals30:19t times w1, x2 equals t times w2, and xn equals t times wn.30:30Because if you substitute x1, to be t times w1 etc., in A times x, then what will happen30:39is the left hand side will be t times A 1 1, let us take the first equation, so, I have30:49A 1 1 x1 plus A1 2 x2 plus A 1 n xn is 0. And I know that A 1 1 w1 plus A12 w2 plus30:57A1n wn is indeed 0. But now, if you substitute t times w1 times w2 and so on in that equation,31:05then you will have A11 times t times w1 plus A1 1 times t times w2 plus A1 n times t times31:12wn and you can pull out the t common and then you will get t times A11 w1 plus A12 w2 plus31:20A1n wn, which we know is 0.31:23So, that is t times 0, which is 0. So, that is, that is the other way of thinking about31:28this. So, if you have a homogeneous system, that is something special. So, in a homogeneous31:37system of equations, if there are more variables than equations, then it is guaranteed to have31:43non trivial solutions, why is this? So, what is what is being said here, so, you have n31:50variables remember and m equations. So, you have a matrix of size m by n, where these32:02rows are corresponding to equations and columns are corresponding to variables.32:08So, now, if you have more variables than equations, then what happens, then when you put it into32:18reduced row echelon form, when you have any, only m rows, but you have n columns, and n32:25this strictly greater than m, so, the leading coefficients, the leading ones can occur only32:29in at most in many places. So, there will be some columns, which do not have leading32:35ones, that means, there are some independent variables. And as soon as you have independent32:41variables, you will have an infinite number of solutions. So, in particular, you will32:48have nonzero solutions or non trivial solutions.32:51In this video, you have studied the Gaussian elimination method, where we put together32:56the fact that we can find the solutions for a matrix in reduced row echelon form, the33:02coefficient matrix is reduced row echelon form, along with the fact that any matrix33:06can be reduced to reduces row echelon form, using elementary row operations. Those were33:11the contents of the last two videos. And this is a much more powerful method, it is far33:15more efficient than the previous methods, even when your matrix A is invertible.33:20So, this is a, this is a method that you will actually use in practice, and it is much more33:28efficient. And even to compute the inverse of A rather than computing all the miners33:33and so on this method is far more powerful also to compute the determinant which we did33:38in the previous video. So, Gaussian elimination method is the most powerful method we know33:43in these contexts. And we have seen explicitly using it, how to find all the solutions, we33:51can check whether there is a solution at all and then we can take which, once we know there33:55is at least one which of those are solutions.33:58And finally, we have seen for homogeneous equations. That is for a homogeneous system,34:040 is always a solution. So, the question is, are there other solutions? And we also know34:11how to find those, again using Gaussian elimination method. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.