---
title: "L3.4 Linear independence - Part 1 :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L3.4 Linear independence - Part 1 :: IITM Online Degree

L3.4 Linear independence - Part 1

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of  this online B.Sc. program in data science. Today,  00:20we are going to study the topic of Linear  Independence. In the last couple of videos,  00:27we have studied the idea of linear dependence.  So, in particular, we saw the notion of  00:34linear combinations of vectors. So, let me  remind you that now we are studying vectors  00:41in the sense of elements of a vector space,  which we defined our two videos before this.  00:47So, we defined the notion of linear combination  which is nothing but a some summation aivi, where  00:54vi's are vectors in a vector space and ai's  are real numbers. So, this is a finite sum  01:04a1v2 plus a2v2 plus anvn. And we  talked about linear dependence.  01:10So, today, in this video, we are going  to talk about linear independence.  01:14Let us quickly recall what is linear dependence.  So, we say that a set of vectors v1, v2, vn from a  01:20vector space V we call them linearly dependent  if there exists scalars a1, a2, an such that  01:28a1v1 plus a2v2 plus anvn is 0. Now, of course,  there is a crucial condition extra which is that  01:35not all of the coefficients should be 0. So,  at least some coefficient must be non-zero.  01:43If all the coefficients are 0, of course, we  know that a1v1 plus a2v2 plus anvn is 0.  01:49So, the point is that there is some linear  combination with non-zero coefficients. So,  01:54some coefficients are non-zero so that the sum is  still 0. So, if there exist such scalars then we  02:02say that v1, v2, vn is linearly dependent. So,  equivalently in terms of linear combinations  02:09which is something I defined last time and we just  talked about, if we can express the 0 vector as a  02:16linear combination of v1, v2, vn with non-zero  coefficients, which means that there are some  02:22coefficients, meaning at least one coefficient  which is non-zero, then we say that v1,  02:27v2, vn are linearly dependent. So, we have  studied this notion in the previous video.  02:33So, in this video, we are going to talk about  linear independence. So, we say that a set of  02:39vectors v1, v2, vn from a vector space V we  call them linearly independent if they are  02:46not linearly dependent. So, this is a very easy  definition. We have already studied what is linear  02:53dependence. So, we will say they are linearly  independent if they are not linearly dependent.  03:00So, what does this mean in terms of linear  combinations and summing up to 0?  03:07So, the equivalent formulation is a set of  vectors v1, v2, vn from a vector space V  03:13is said to be linearly independent if the  equation a1v1 plus a2v2 plus anvn is 0  03:22can only be satisfied when ai is 0. So, just to  go back to dependence, dependence said there is  03:30some linear combination, there is some, there are  some scalars a1, a2, an, not all of which are 0,  03:38so that when you take the sum a1v1 plus a2v2 plus  anvn you get 0. Linear independence is saying,  03:45if there is a linear combination, meaning if there  is a sum a1v1 plus a2v2 plus anvn which is 0,  03:52then the only way in which this can  happen is if the ai's are all 0.  03:58So, equivalently in terms of linear combinations,  we are saying that a set of vectors v1, v2,  04:04vn is linearly independent if  the only linear combination  04:11of these vectors v1, v2, vn which equals 0 is  the linear combination with all coefficients 0.  04:18So, let us take a pause and understand what we are  saying here. If the coefficients are 0, certainly  04:25summation aivi is 0. If all the ai's are  0, then summation aivi is going to be 0.  04:33So, what we are saying is that if the sum is 0,  then the coefficients must be 0. In other words,  04:39the only way of getting 0 as a linear  combination is if the coefficients are 0.  04:45So, I want to emphasize that this means we have  to check something is linearly independent,  04:51which we will do at the end of this video.  We have to check that all the ai's are 0.  04:59So, let us do some examples. So, let  us first check out this example in R2.  05:06So, look at the two vectors  minus 1 comma 3 and 2 comma 0.  05:12So, we want to see if which coefficients  give us that the sum is 0. So, you write this  05:19equation, a times minus 1 comma 3 plus b  times 2 comma 0 is 0 comma 0 and then you  05:26try to solve for a and b. So, if you do that,  you equate the corresponding coordinates.  05:34So, the first coordinate for the left hand side is  minus a plus 2 times b, the first coordinate for  05:40the right hand side is 0. They are equal so that  means these two must be the same. So, minus a plus  05:452b is 0. And the second coordinate is 3 times a  plus 0 times b, which is just 3 times a. And the  05:51second coordinate on the right is 0. So, you get  3 times a is 0. So, we have a system of linear  05:56equations, minus a plus 2b is 0 and 3a is 0. Now, we know how to solve a system of linear  06:02equations. We in fact know very general method for  that. And indeed, towards the end of the video,  06:08we will start using that method. But for now,  you can see this is very easy to solve. Namely,  06:143 times a 0, so a must be 0. And once a  is 0, you put that into the first equation  06:20and you get that 2 times b is 0. So, b is 0. So, the unique solution for this system is a 0  06:30and b 0, which means that if a times minus 1  comma 3 plus b times 2 comma 0 is 0 comma 0,  06:38the only solutions of, the only coefficients which  yield this identity to be true are a is 0 and b is  06:470\. That means, the vectors minus 1 comma 3  and 2 comma 0 are linearly independent.  06:55Let us look at the 0 vector. This is a very  special vector in our vector space. So, suppose  07:03I have a set of vectors v1, v2, vn and one of the  vectors here is the 0 vector. So, suppose vi is 0.  07:10One of them is 0. Let us say that one is vi. So,  then what you do is you choose the ith coordinate,  07:16sorry, you choose the ith coefficient to be 1 and  you choose the jth coefficient, where j is not i  07:26to be 0. So, if you do that, then look at this  linear combination, a1v1 plus a2v2 plus anvn,  07:36now for all the vectors where j is not i, aj  times vj is going to be 0, because aj is 0.  07:48On the other hand for the ith vector, you have ai  times vi, vi is 0, so ai times vi is also 0. So,  07:56for each of these terms, a1v1, a2v2 etc. up till  anvn each term is 0. Hence, the sum is also 0.  08:05So, the linear combination is 0. But of course,  all the coefficients are not 0, because ai is 1.  08:12So, one of the coefficients is 1. So, not all  these coefficients are 0. So, what does that mean?  08:18That means a set of vectors which contains the  0 vector is always a linearly dependent set. So,  08:25this is not linearly independent. So, if  your v1, v2, vn happens to contain 0, then  08:31this is linearly dependent. It is not linearly  independent. So, let us keep this in mind.  08:39So, now let us ask the question when a two  non-zero vectors linearly independent. So,  08:44we have already seen that if a vector is 0,  you take that in your collection of vectors,  08:50then that is a linearly dependent set. So, now we  can take two non-zero vectors. That is your first  08:59starting point for our discussion. So,  let us take two non-zero vectors and ask  09:05when are they linearly independent? When is  the set of vectors linearly independent?  09:10So, let v1 and v2 be two non-zero vectors.  So, suppose v1 and v2 are linearly dependent.  09:19So, we want to study when they are linearly  independent instead we will study when they are  09:23linearly dependent and from there we will conclude  when they are linearly independent. So, suppose v1  09:29and v2 are linearly dependent that means a1v1  plus a2v2 is 0 for some coefficients a1 and a2,  09:37and these coefficients, both of these coefficients  are not 0. So, we are saying a1v1 plus  09:46a2v2 is 0 for some coefficients a1 and a2,  09:50where both of them, I mean, at least one  of them is non-zero. So, at least one  10:00of a1 or a2 is not 0. That is the  definition of a linear dependence.  10:11But the point is here, since the vectors  are non-zero, if one of them, one of these  10:17coefficients is non-zero, then the other better  be non-zero, because otherwise you will have,  10:23let us say, a1 is non-zero, but a2 is 0, then you  will have a1 times v1 which is a non-zero vector  10:30equates to 0 that cannot be possible. So, if one  of them is not zero, then both of them are not  10:360\. And really, that is what this statement here  means. So, keep in mind that one of a1 or a2 is  10:41non-zero and so both of them must be non-zero.  That was the import of this statement here.  10:49So, dividing by a1 and putting c is minus a2 by  a1, we get that v1 is c times v2. And so v1 and  10:56v2 are multiples of each other. So, what are  we saying? We are saying that if v1 and v2 are  11:02linearly dependent, then v1 and v2 are multiples  of each other. And we can go backwards. We can  11:08reverse this set of statements. So, we can reverse  the implications above and conclude that if v1  11:15and v2 are multiples of each other, then they are  linearly independent. If v1 and v2 are multiples,  11:21then v1 is c times v2 for some c. And then note that c is non-zero,  11:34because both v1 and v2 are non-zero vectors and  then you can write this as v1 minus c times v2  11:41is 0 and so the coefficients are 1 and minus  c, and in fact, both of them are non-zero.  11:46Actually, it is enough for them, one of  them to be non-zero. But in this case,  11:49both of them are non-zero. And so we get that they  are linearly dependent. So, that is what I mean by  11:55we can reverse the implications. So, the conclusion is, if two,  12:00you have two non-zero vectors, then they are  linearly independent precisely when they are not  12:05multiples of each other. We have seen that linear  dependence of two non-zero vectors is equivalent  12:11to them being multiples of each other. So, linear  independence is exactly same as saying that they  12:18are not multiples of each other. Let me qualify  this coefficient a1 and a2 so, where at least  12:28one of a1 or a2 is not 0. And as I said, because  both the vectors are non-zero and you have only  12:41two vectors in this case both of them must  be non-zero. That is what we are saying.  12:48So, the take home from here is, if you have two  non-zero vectors, then linear independence means  12:53that they are not multiples of each other. So,  the point one is trying to make here is that  12:58linear independence as a notion is a very useful  and important notion and it is saying something  13:07very important about these vectors,  namely that they are not multiples.  13:13So, let us ask the same of what happens to  three vectors? Let us ask the same question  13:18for three vectors. When the three vectors linearly  independent what does that say? So, we will do the  13:25same thing. We will first study when they are  dependent and then from there we will try to  13:29draw conclusions for when they are independent.  So, suppose v1, v2 and v3 are linearly dependent  13:36then we have an equation of the form a1v1  plus a2v2 plus a3v3 is 0 where for some  13:43coefficients a1, a2, a3 where at least one of  the coefficients is non-zero, which is exactly  13:49what I wanted to say on the previous slide as  well. At least one of these is non-zero.  13:56So, let us assume that a1 is non-zero. We will, in  a minute we will also study the other cases, but  14:03this is a prototype case. Let us study a1 is  not 0. So, if a1 is not 0, I can divide by a1  14:10and I can take the terms for v2 and v3 on  the other side and I can write v1 as b2v2  14:19plus b2v2, b3v3, this should be b3v3, where  b2 is minus a2 by a1 and b3 is minus a3 by a1.  14:33So, v1 is a linear combination of the other two  vectors that is the main point. This is b3.  14:41So, now we can make the same argument of a2 is  non-zero or a3 is non-zero. Remember that we  14:46know that one of them is non-zero. If it is not  a1, maybe a2 is non-zero, maybe a3 is non-zero.  14:52And you can see that you can make the same  argument and express. So, if a2 is non-zero,  14:57you can express v2 as a linear combination of  the other two. And if a3 is non-zero, you can  15:02express v3 as a linear combination of the other  two vectors. And I again note that this is b3.  15:13So, once again these implications  are reversible. So, if, let us say  15:21if v1 is b2v2 plus b3v3, so then I can write, I  can take the v2 and v3 terms on the other side and  15:31write v1 minus b2v2 minus b3v3 is 0, but remember  that v1 has coefficient 1. So, I get 1 times v1  15:43minus b2 times v2 minus b3 times v3 is 0, which  tells me that I have a linear combination where at  15:50least one of the coefficients is non-zero, which  one, the coefficient for v1, because that is 1.  15:57And so this is linear, they are linearly  dependent. And you can argue the same way  16:02if v2 is a linear combination of v1 and v3  or v3 is a linear combination of v1 and v2.  16:09So, these implications are reversible. So, the upshot is that,  16:13if you have three vectors v1, v2, v3, which  are linearly dependent, this is exactly the  16:18same as saying that one of these vectors is a  linear combination of the other two vectors.  16:26So, now we can talk about linear independence.  We have studied when they are linearly dependent.  16:32So, we can now answer the question  about linearly independent.  16:36So, if three vectors are linearly  independent, then none of these vectors  16:41is a linear combination of the other  two. That is what we are seeing.  16:45So, you can think of this geometrically.  I will, we will do that in a few minutes.  16:50But already you can start thinking of  what this means in terms of geometry.  16:55So, the conclusion here is the take home.  If three vectors are linearly independent,  17:01this is exactly the same as saying that none of  them is a linear combination of the other two.  17:07Let us look at an example in R3. So, let us take  these three vectors 1, 1, 2, 1, 2, 0 and 0, 2,  17:141\. So, we want to ask whether or not they are  linearly independent. So, let us take some  17:23arbitrary coefficients a, b and c. So, a times 1,  1, 2 plus b times 1, 2, 0 plus c times 0, 2, 1 is  17:290, 0, 0. So, we equate this to 0, 0, 0. And then  we ask, can we get from here what are the choices  17:38for a, b, c, in particular, is there a choice  where at least one of a, b or c is non-zero.  17:45So, we have the following system of linear  equations. How do we get this? By equating the  17:50corresponding coordinates. So, the first  coordinate on the left hand side is  17:53a times 1 plus b times 1 plus  c times 0, which is a plus b.  17:58The first coordinate on the right hand side is  0, so this is a plus b is 0. Similarly, if you  18:04equate the second coordinates, you get a plus 2b  plus 2c is 0. And the third coordinate then you  18:11get 2a plus 0 times b plus 1 times c is 0. So,  that is how you get the system of equations.  18:18Now, let us solve for a, b and c and see  if we can get solutions which are non-zero.  18:26So, from the first equation we get that b is minus  a, from the third equation we get c is minus 2a,  18:34if you substitute into the middle  equation, you get some combination of a is  18:42not 0. So, specifically, you get b, a minus 2  times a minus 4 times a. So, a minus 6 times a,  18:54so minus 5a is 0, which tells you that a is 0.  And then once a is 0, b is minus a, so b is 0,  19:01and c is minus 2a, so c is 0. So, the only  equation for this system is a is, b is, c is 0.  19:09So, what have we achieved? We have achieved  that if you have an equation like this with  19:15coefficients a, b, and c, then the only way this  equation is satisfied, when I say this equation,  19:21I mean, this equation here, the only way this  equation is satisfied is when a is 0, b is 0 and c  19:300\. That tells us that these three vectors 1, 1, 2,  1, 2, 0 and 0, 2, 1 are linearly independent.  19:38So, we have seen in this video the notion of  linearly, a linearly independent set of vectors.  19:44So, we say that a set of vectors is linearly  independent if they are not linearly dependent,  19:52which really means that if you take a linear  combination of these vectors and equate it to 0,  19:57the only way that that is possible is if  all the coefficient are 0. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.