---
title: "L3.1 Introduction to vector spaces :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L3.1 Introduction to vector spaces :: IITM Online Degree

L3.1 Introduction to vector spaces

Transcript Language

English

00:09Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component  of the online B.Sc. course on data science.  00:15In today's video we are going to look at  vector spaces. So, we will basically see  00:20in abstraction things that we have seen in the  past two weeks, wherein we saw vectors in Rn and  00:27we looked at various algebraic properties. And we  saw that these vectors are related to data because  00:31often data comes in a table and we are interested  in particular rows and columns of that table and  00:38some algebraic manipulations on such data. So, we are going to study vector spaces.  00:44This is slightly abstract as compared to previous  videos. But we will see that once we study this,  00:53much of what we have done in the previous  videos can be generalized to a very vast  00:59degree and it will come up when we do vector  calculus later on some principles of this.  01:06So, what are vector spaces? Broadly speaking,  vector spaces are precisely those places  01:11where vectors live. So, we have talked about  vectors, but we have not talked about what,  01:16where these vectors are coming from, because they  always came from Rn. So, in this video, I am going  01:21to try and explain that there is a general notion  of a vector space and then we use these concepts  01:29to glean some information out of vectors which  will come in handy later on. So, let us begin.  01:37So, let us recall first what are vectors in Rn?  So, we have defined vectors in Rn as n-tuples  01:45of real numbers, so x1, x2, xn, where each x is a  real number. So, now suppose we have two vectors  01:52x1, x2, xn and y1, y2, yn in Rn and we  have a scalar which means a real number  01:59c. So, we can define addition of these vectors.  So, addition is remember coordinate wise. What  02:05that means is, if you do x1, x2, xn plus y1,  y2, yn, you get x1 plus y2 in the first place,  02:11x2 plus y2 in the second place, and so on  up till xn plus yn in the nth place.  02:16Similarly, we have defined scalar multiplication.  So, this meant you to take this scalar c,  02:22this is a real number, and multiply to, let us  say, x1, x2, xn, and what we get is coordinate  02:29wise multiplication, which means you get c times  x1, c times x2 and then c times xn at the end.  02:37So, what are the properties of  addition and scalar multiplication?  02:41So, suppose we have vectors v, w and v prime  in Rn, and suppose a and b are scalars,  02:48so we are going to bring out certain properties  of vectors. These are going to be very easy  02:54and you might wonder why we are doing this. But  in the subsequent five minutes from now, we are  03:00use these same properties and they will be the  guiding principles for what is a vector space.  03:07So, one of the properties we know about  vectors is that if you take two vectors  03:10then if you add them in a particular way, v plus  w, then you could add them in the opposite way,  03:17meaning w plus v and both these give you  the same answer. So, v plus w is w plus v.  03:24Similarly, if you take three vectors, you  could add them. And then you have to first ask,  03:30should I add the first two first and then  the third to the result or should I add the  03:36last two, the second and third first and then  add that to the first. And the answer is it  03:42does not matter, because they are clearly  the same. This is easy checking in Rn.  03:49And then we have something called the 0 vector  and the 0 vector satisfies that, 0 vector is  03:55the one where all the entries are 0, so 0, 0, 0  n times. And it satisfies that if you add that  04:02to any vector from either side meaning v plus  0 or 0 plus V, then you get back the vector v.  04:11Then we have a vector called minus v, which is  the, so v is v1, v2, vn, the components are v1,  04:21v2, vn and then minus v has components minus  v1, minus v2, minus v1. And we can clearly see  04:26that if you do v plus minus v, then you get 0. And  similarly, if you do minus v plus v, we get 0.  04:34And then we have this very nice  property that if you take 1,  04:40which is the scalar number 1, a real number 1 and  multiply to v, well you get just the v. So, v,  04:481 times v is v. And then if you  take these two scalars, a and b,  04:55and then if you take a times b, that is a new real  number and then multiply that to v, then that is  05:02the same as first multiplying b to v and then  multiplying a to the result of what we got.  05:12And then you have a times v plus w, which is a  times v plus a times w. So, a distributes over  05:20addition. So, scalar multiplication distributes  over addition. And then finally, we have,  05:26if you take a plus b times v, so you take these  two real numbers, you add them, and then multiply  05:32that to v, that is the same as first doing scalar  multiplication of a and v, then b and v and then  05:38adding the two that gives you the same thing. So, these are clearly obvious properties  05:46in Rn which you can see or you can do the  algebra and check that they are the same,  05:53that they are satisfied. So, we are going to use  these to define a vector space. So, a vector space  06:00is a set with two operations, like addition and  scalar multiplication. So, they are, in fact,  06:06called addition and scalar multiplication.  And it has the properties 1 through 8. So,  06:12I am going to make a formal definition now. So, a vector space V over R, so why over R? What  06:20this means is that the numbers we are going to  use for scalar multiplication are real numbers.  06:25So, actually, you could use other kinds of  numbers. But for this course, the real numbers  06:30are good enough. So, a vector space V over R  is a set along with two functions, which I am  06:36going to denote by plus. So, this plus is going  to correspond to what was addition in Rn and  06:44dot, dot was going to, is going to correspond  to what the scalar multiplication in Rn.  06:51So, this dot is from R cross V to V. That means  if you take a scalar and V and an element of V,  06:59you get back an element of V. And similarly,  if you take two elements of V, you get V. So,  07:07what is written here is that is for each  pair of elements v1 and v2 in V, there is  07:12a unique element v1 plus v2 in V. And for each  constant, that is a scalar in R and vector v in V  07:23there is a unique element c dot  v in V. That is what we mean by,  07:28we have these two kinds of functions. So, you should use, the intuition here  07:32is that plus corresponds to addition and  dot corresponds to scalar multiplication.  07:37So, it is standard to suppress the dot and  to write c times v instead of c dot with v.  07:45So, this is exactly what we did in the Rn. We  did not, we do not keep using multiplied by. We  07:51keep, we suppress the multiplied by because  we consider it as obvious. So, similarly,  07:58here, we are going to suppress the dot and we  are going to write just c times v for scalar  08:03multiplication. So, the functions plus and dot  are required to satisfy the following rules and  08:09this is exactly the set of rules 1 through 8. So, what are the rules? If you take two vectors v1  08:15and v2, so what are vectors? Vectors are elements  of this set capital V, our vector space capital V.  08:22So, if you take two vectors v1 and v2, v1 plus  v2 is v2 plus v1, you take three vectors v1,  08:29v2 and v3, then you can first add v1 and v2 and  then add the result to v3 or you can first add  08:38v2 and v3 and add the result v1 and the outcome  of both these processes is the same. So, this is,  08:48in other words you say that the operation  plus, the function plus is associative.  08:55That is a mathematical terminology for this. There exists an element v in V, 0 in V which,  09:04we are going to denote it also by 0. And what does  it satisfy, it satisfies that v plus 0 is v. So,  09:11when you add any vector to 0, then you get back  the same vector. And property 1 here, axiom one,  09:20ensures that v plus 0 is the same as 0 plus  v. So, you could have also have written this  09:25as v plus 0 is 0 plus v is v, which is  how you will find it in some books.  09:30So, for every element V, there exists an element  v prime, such that v plus v prime is 0. So,  09:37this v prime is like minus v. This v  prime is playing the role of minus v.  09:43So, for each element v in V, 1 times v is v.  What is this 1? This 1 is the 1 in the real  09:50numbers. And what is this 1 times v? This  is scalar multiplication. So, we are scalar  09:55multiplying 1 and v and the output is just v. And then again, if you have two elements a and b,  10:04that is two real numbers a and b,  and you choose to multiply them to a  10:11vector v, we can do it in two possible  ways. We could first multiply a and b,  10:15that is multiplication in real  numbers and then multiply the product,  10:20by that I mean scalar multiply the product  to v, that is the left hand side of this  10:25expression or we could do b times v, which is  scalar multiplication of v and b, and then,  10:31so that is again a vector,  and then we take a and that  10:36new vector b times v and do scalar multiplication  and we get a times bv. So, both these  10:45operations, both the ways of doing this yield  the same result. That is what this is saying.  10:52And then finally, well, not finally, we have  one more to go. So, for each element a in  10:59R, so that means each real number, if you take two  vectors v1 and v2 and you do a times v1 plus v2,  11:05then that is the same as doing a times v1  plus a times v2. So, it distributes over  11:12addition. Scalar multiplication  distributes over addition.  11:17And then, if you have two real numbers a and b  and you have a vector v, then you can get a plus b  11:23times v or you can do a times v plus b times v and  the result is the same. This is exactly the 1 to 8  11:38that we saw two slides back or maybe  in the previous, two slides back,  11:43which were properties of the vectors in Rn.  And we are going, we are saying that any set  11:52along with these two operations, these two  functions plus and not, which satisfies those  11:578 conditions is a vector space. Now, of course, one, so obviously an  12:06example of a vector space is Rn with the  usual addition and scalar multiplication,  12:13but there are other examples. For example, we could take the matrices. So, we  12:16have seen matrices in the last week or maybe last  two weeks. So, you take m by n matrices with real  12:24entries. So, we are going to denote that set by m  subscript m cross n. We have done this last week.  12:35So, this is the set of all matrices, m by n  matrices with real numbers, so m rows and n  12:40columns in this any particular matrix. So, now, remember that when we  12:48dealt with matrices, we define  addition of matrices and we define  12:52scalar multiplication of matrices.  This is from the second video maybe.  12:58So, how did we do that, I will  quickly recall. So, if you do A plus B  13:03and so I have to, if I have to tell you what is A  plus B, I have to tell you what is the ijth entry  13:08of A plus B, that is what specifies a matrix. So,  the ijth entry of A plus B is you take the ijth  13:15entry of A and add that to the ijth entry of  B. This is how you define the sum A plus B.  13:26And similarly, if you take the scalar  multiplication that means I have to tell  13:30you what is c times A where c is a real number  and A is a matrix then what you do is you take c  13:38and multiply it to each entry of A that is scalar  multiplication. So, the ijth entry in particular  13:43is c times Aij. So, we have addition and scalar  multiplication and we actually have checked along  13:54the way in that video for matrices some of those  I stated and some of those we actually did.  14:02We checked those axioms or we at least  stated those axioms. So, the conditions  14:07required for this to have to a vector, to  be, for the matrices to be a vector space  14:13have been stated or checked already. And  if not, they are anyway easy to check.  14:17So, I would encourage you, I need to  check them again if you have forgotten.  14:26So, that makes the m by n matrices  with real entries a vector space.  14:34Another example is if you take solutions of a  homogeneous system. So, we have seen systems  14:41of linear equations and we have seen what is the  homogeneous system. So, homogeneous system looks  14:47like Ax equals 0, and then solutions are exactly  those vectors x such that this is satisfied.  14:57So, let us look at the set. So, consider a  set of solutions V. So, we are going to write  15:03V as or denote by V, the set of solutions  of a homogeneous system Ax equals 0,  15:11and A is a matrix, let us say of size m by  n. So, this means it has m linear equations  15:18in n unknowns or n variables. So, x is  consists of the coordinates x1, x2, xn.  15:28So, now if we have two vectors, v and w, well, I  am calling them vectors, because we know that v  15:35and w are already, I mean, this is a set of  solutions. So, this is already a subset of  15:42Rn. So, the set V is a subset of Rn. So, let  us keep that in mind. So, when I say vectors,  15:50I mean vectors in Rn. So, we have two vectors  in Rn, which are actually in this subset v.  15:58So, both of these are solutions of this  linear system, of this homogeneous system.  16:04So, then I can look at v plus w. And I can do  A times v plus w. And then we have seen that  16:13how matrix products work. That tells  us that A times v plus w is A times  16:18v plus A times w, but both v and w are coming  from capital V, which is the set of solutions.  16:27That means A times v is 0 and A times w is 0.  That means this is 0 plus 0, which gives us 0.  16:34So, what does the net result? The net  result is that v plus w is in V.  16:42So, similarly, if you do, if you take a scalar  c and multiply it to a vector little v, such  16:50that little v is in capital V, meaning little  v is a solution of this homogeneous system,  16:57then I can do A times, c times v. So, c  times v remember is scalar multiplication.  17:04But, while we have seen this before, you  can actually take the c out, because I mean,  17:13so you can check this if you are unsure. So, basically, you can, if you want,  17:18you can write this as c times the identity  matrix of size n by n, and then you can move  17:24to the other side of A and write it as c times  identity matrix of size m by m. That is one way.  17:32And there are, you could just directly do this by  checking out the multiplication. So, the c comes  17:40out and then that gives us c times A times v. But remember, v is a solution of this system,  17:47which means that A times v is 0, that means  you get c times 0, which is 0. So, what is  17:53the net result? The net result is that c times  v belongs to V. So, what this implies is that  18:04addition and scalar multiplication in Rn restricts  to the solution set. So, I will qualify this. So,  18:11from here, first of all, what we can say is  that v plus w belongs to V. And from here,  18:17what we can see is that c times v belongs to  V. And I am saying that once we know this,  18:26we know it is a vector space. Now, you are probably wondering why  18:30am I saying this, because I need to check the  axioms. We, there is a set of eight conditions  18:35and I have to check those. Well, so the point is,  18:40this is, remember, a subset of Rn and we already  know that for Rn all those axioms hold. So,  18:47for every subset also those axioms will hold. The  only axiom that we have to extra check maybe is  18:59that, well, not the axiom, but what we have  to really check is that when we do addition  19:06then we could in principle get  a vector which is not in V. So,  19:10we have seen here that that does not happen. If we add two vectors in V, we get a vector in V.  19:16And similarly, if you use scalar multiply you  get a vector in V. And that is the only thing  19:21that is required. Once we have done this, we  know that this is a vector space, because all  19:26the other axioms are already satisfied since  V is a subset of Rn. So, this is an example of  19:36what is called a subspace of a vector space. So, basically, it is a subset along with these  19:42properties that if you take two things, two  vectors in that subset, the sum is in the  19:47subset and if you take a vector in the subset and  you do scalar multiplication, then it belongs to  19:53the subset. So, automatically, this subset will  inherit the property of being a vector space.  20:03So, this is an example. Let us look at a couple of non-examples.  20:09So, suppose I do addition and multiplication  in R2 as follows. This is some strange addition  20:14and multiplication. So, you do x1 comma x2 plus  y1 comma y2 is x1 plus y1, so first coordinate  20:21there is addition. And in the second coordinate  there is subtraction, so you do x2 minus y2.  20:28So, this is the definition of the plus. And then  c times x1, x2 is c times x comma c times x2. So,  20:40the scalar multiplication is the usual scalar  multiplication. So, some things fail what fails.  20:46So, check that 1, 2 and 8 fail. So, first of all let us  20:53just to get a hang, feel for this, let us check  that 1 fails. So, 1 fails, why does 1 fail,  21:02because if I do x1 comma x2 plus y1 comma y2,  well, that is written up here, that is x1 plus y1,  21:12x2 minus y2. And if I do y1  comma y2 plus x1 comma x2,  21:21then I get y1 plus x1, which is not a problem.  But the next term is going to give me y2 minus x2  21:29and these are not the same as you can see. For example, if you do, let us say 0, 0 plus 1,  21:381, and 1, 1 plus 0, 0, the answer here  is 1 comma minus 1, the answer here is  21:481 comma 1. They are not the same. So, these two  are not the same. So, the first axiom side that  21:55v plus w is w plus v, and that fails. You can  check similarly that the second axiom fails  22:01and you can check similarly that the eighth  axiom fails. So, I will leave that to you.  22:09So, let us do another example. So, this time let  us define it as x1 comma x2 plus y1 comma y2 is  22:18x1 plus y1 comma 0 and c times x1 comma x2 is c  times x1 comma 0. And this time, I maybe want to  22:26do the checking. So, what fails, check that the  third, fourth and fifth axioms fail. I will not,  22:38let me leave this to you as an exercise.  This is not hard to do. But it is important  22:42to do this because that way you will sort of  develop an idea for what is a vector space.  22:50And in particular, how defining these operations  is really at the heart of what is a vector space,  22:57addition and scalar multiplication. Let us quickly recall what we have done  23:04thus far in this video. We have defined what is  a vector space which we saw was basically the  23:10abstraction of the properties of Rn. We saw  the examples of vector spaces apart from Rn,  23:18for example, matrices, and very importantly,  the example of the solution set of a homogeneous  23:26system of linear equations. That is really  what we are going to, that you should remember  23:30and keep in mind as we go ahead. So, thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.