---
title: "L3.2 Some properties of vector spaces :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L3.2 Some properties of vector spaces :: IITM Online Degree

L3.2 Some properties of vector spaces

Transcript Language

English

00:09Hello, and welcome to the online B.Sc. program  on data science and programming. In this video,  00:15we are going to continue from our previous video  where we introduced vector spaces and study some  00:20properties of vector spaces. In particular,  we will build on the axioms that we have seen  00:25in the definition of a vector space. So, let us derive a consequence of the  00:35axioms, the conditions that are needed in order  to, for something to be a vector space. So,  00:42this is called the cancellation law vector  addition. So, if v1 plus v, you have three  00:47vectors, v1, v2, v3 in the vector space V,  and v1 plus v3 is v2 plus v3, then v1 is v2.  00:56Now, let us first see how we do this in Rn. So,  let us try to recall how we do this in Rn.  01:06So, in Rn, what do we do? So, in Rn what we  do is, let me do it for example in three R3,  01:23z1, z2, z3 plus y1, y2, y3.  01:34So, how will I conclude that  x1, x2, x3 is the same as  01:37z1, z2, z3? Well, what I will say is this means  x1 plus y1 is z1 plus y1 or more generally xi  01:48plus yi is zi plus yi, where i is between 1  and 3, 1, 2, 3. And then from real numbers,  01:56I know that xi plus yi is zi plus implies xi is  equal to zi. How do I know that, because if you  02:05add minus yi on both sides, then  indeed what you get is xi, zi.  02:11So, you can subtract yi from both  sides. This was imply xi is zi.  02:30And from here we conclude that x1, x2, x3 is  the same as z1, z2, z3. So, this is how we do  02:38it for real numbers, sorry, for R3 or in general  for any Rn. So, then let us see how to do it.  02:47I mean, we can use the same idea  to do it for general vector spaces.  02:51So, v1 plus v3 is v2 plus v3. So, this was  the argument in Rn. So, now we are given  03:11that v1 plus v3 is v2 plus v3. This  is argument for general vector spaces.  03:20V3 is v2 plus v3. Well, one of  the axioms told us that for v3  03:29there exists some v3 prime such that there exists  v3 prime such that v3 plus v3 prime is 0.  03:47So, what that tells me is v1 plus  v3 plus v3 prime is v2 plus v3  03:56plus v3 prime. But now we know that addition  is associative. So, I can write this as v1 plus  04:06v3 plus v3 prime is v2 plus v3 plus v3 prime  which implies that v1 plus 0 is v2 plus 0  04:24which implies v1 is v2. So, this proves a  statement here. So, notice that all I used was  04:33the axioms. I did not use any other thing,  any other information about the structure of  04:40v because really I do not know anything else.  The only things I know are the axioms.  04:46So, whenever you want to check something for  a vector space, you have to use the axioms.  04:50But to get intuition about whether it is correct  or wrong and how to go about a proof in case it  04:55is correct, you should look at Rn, see how  you do it in Rn and then sort of extrapolate  05:02that idea for general vector spaces. So, here is a corollary of the cancellation  05:09law. The vector 0 described in three is unit.  So, remember, one of the axioms was that  05:16there is a vector called 0, but maybe there are  many vectors satisfying that same property. So,  05:21this corollary says, you cannot have many vectors.  And here is another corollary, namely that if you  05:29looked at the vector v prime, this was in axiom  4 which, so this axiom 4 is what we used in order  05:37to conclude the cancellation law by looking at  v3 prime. So, the vector v prime described in  05:43four is unique and it is standard to refer to it  as minus v. And even this reference to minus v  05:50will be clarified in our upcoming slide. So, maybe let us quickly do this proof from  06:00the cancellation law. So, suppose  I have another vector called  06:06w, such that w also satisfies the  same property that v does. So, suppose  06:16there exists w in v such that v plus  w is v for all v in V. This was what  06:270 satisfies. But then v plus  w is v means what, v plus w  06:34is v plus 0, because v plus 0 is also v. So, I  can write it like this. But then I can cancel.  06:45So, I am adding v on both sides, so I can  cancel v. So, the idea is here to add v prime.  06:53And so that leaves us with w 0. So, cancellation means I can do this  06:59that leaves us with w 0. So, the vector 0  as described in the third axiom is unique.  07:07And similarly, the vector v prime  described in 4 is unique. And  07:11so, v plus v prime is 0. So, now suppose  v double prime also satisfies this.  07:33So, then v plus v prime is 0 is  07:39v plus v double prime. And now you  can use cancellation. So, cancel v  07:48and therefore, v prime is  equal to v double prime. So,  07:56that is the proof of this corollary  from the cancellation law.  08:02Let us look for some other properties. So, in  any vector space V, the following statements  08:10hold true; 0 times v is 0 for each v;  08:16minus c times v is minus of cv and  that is the same as c times minus v.  08:23So, what is minus v, minus v is exactly the  vector v prime, which was described in axiom 4 and  08:30our previous slide told us that it is unique.  And hence, we can refer to it as minus v, because  08:38we know that that is the vector that when you  added to v you get 0. So, c times 0 is 0 for each  08:48constant in our each scalar c in R.  08:52So, let us try and prove this. So, what I  can do is I can look at 0 plus 0 times v. And  09:02one of the axioms tells me that  this is 0 times v plus 0 times v.  09:07On the other hand, 0 times v is, 0 plus  0 is exactly 0, which is 0 times v. So,  09:18what is the net result? The net result  is that 0 times v plus 0 times v.  09:26So, you can write this as 0 times v plus 0 is  0 times v plus 0 times v, cancel 0 times v.  09:38And that implies 0 is equal to 0 times  v. So, that gives us the result.  09:47And then we have minus c times v is minus cv  is c times minus v. So, how do I get this?  09:55The idea is exactly what we have done above. So,  we have c plus minus c times v is c times v plus  10:06minus c times v. But on the other hand, I  know that this is 0 times v, which we have  10:11just proved 0, so c times v plus minus c times v  is 0. So, that means minus c times v satisfies the  10:26condition required of the negative of cv. So, this implies minus c times v is minus of  10:36cv. And then similarly, you  can check for c times minus v.  10:46Finally, we have c times 0 is 0. And  maybe I leave this to you because it  10:49is in a very similar spirit to what we  have done earlier. So, check this.  11:00So, let us do an example sort of from so  to say from real life. This is an example  11:06that we have seen in the previous video,  the example of stock taking. So, what  11:16do we have here? We have stock taking in a  grocery shop. So, we have five items; rice in kg,  11:21dal in kg, oil in liters, biscuits in packets  and soap bars. And the first column describes how  11:31many of which quantity is in stock, the second  column describes the demand for each product  11:40for buyer A, the second, third column  describes the same thing for buyer B,  11:46the fourth one for buyer C, and the last one  describes what is a new stock that has arrived.  11:54So, what is, I mean, we did vectors  in this context by looking at the  11:58corresponding column vectors and so on. So, but we  can also think of this as a abstract vector space.  12:07So, what is the vector space showing up here?  12:20So, the vector space is  12:29the quantity of rice in kg,  12:35the quantity of dal in kg,  12:45the quantity of oil in liters,  13:04the number of biscuits or the  number of biscuit packets,  13:19and finally, the number of soap bars.  13:34So, it is this set. And so the claim is that this  13:41is a vector space. Why, because if you add,  you add coordinate wise and what you get is,  13:49say if you have two vectors in this are  added, you get the total quantity of rice  13:57within those two vectors, the total quantity of  dal in kg, the total quantity of oil in liters,  14:05the number of, total number of biscuit packets  and the number of soap bars, total number of  14:12soap bars that is how you do addition and  scalar multiplication is coordinate wise.  14:23So, it so happens that this  vector space looks very much like  14:35R5. And why is that, because we have  5 quantities. And of course, here know  14:46once we write it like this, we have  to also ask what does one mean by  14:52negative quantities and negative number of soap  bars. So, this again we saw in that example  15:00what negative corresponded to.  So, negative corresponded to  15:04demand and positive corresponded to  supply. So, negative corresponds.  15:30So, for example, if you have minus 2 kgs of  15:33rice that means that there is a demand for  2 kgs of rice. And if we say that there are  15:413.5 liters of oil that means there  is a supply of 3.5 liters of oil.  15:51And then we can use this  plus and minus in order to  15:54take stock. This was exactly how we did it in that  example. So, of course, one has to also interpret  16:02things like what is half a biscuit packet  or what is one-eighth of a soap bar. So,  16:08one of the things that we do as a result is that  we often express them in units for which we can  16:16have any real number instead of only natural  numbers. So, then it seems more natural.  16:24So, for example, if instead of  biscuit packets we had written  16:31100 grams of biscuits if we know that, let us say,  16:35one biscuit packet is 100 grams or if instead  of soap bar we had written 400 grams of soup,  16:42then there is no issue with decimal  places or what we add and subtract.  16:50So, this is another example of a vector space.  And maybe we will end with this example of affine  16:58flat, which you are going to see again later. So,  suppose we have, so this is a slightly geometric  17:05view of vector spaces and deliberately convoluted  one, so that I want you to sort of also be  17:14comfortable with the geometry involved  here. So, maybe before I start the example,  17:21I should point out that much of  what we will do is formal algebra.  17:25But behind the scenes, there is geometry which  is guiding our algebra. Whenever we say R3 or R2  17:33in our mind, we have geometry. We understand two  dimensional space or three dimensional space.  17:40So, suppose V is a plane parallel to the  XY plane. So, we are going to define an  17:44addition and a scalar multiplication of  points on V. So, scalar multiplication  17:52is going to be done as follows. So, let Q  belong to this plane and let c be a constant.  18:00So, you project Q onto the XY plane,  scale the resulting vector by c  18:05and project the result back to V. This is the  procedure for doing scalar multiplication. So,  18:11what is c times Q? C times Q is a tip of  the obtained arrow. This is the procedure  18:20for scalar multiplication. Maybe let me draw a quick picture here.  18:37So, here is your plane, here is your point.  So, drop this perpendicular to the XY plane  18:54and then draw this  19:00line here and then if you want to scale this by c,  19:09so if you scale it by c, then that  means you are going to get some new  19:16vectors, something like this, and  then project this back up to the  19:24original space. So, you will get maybe  something here. So, this is your point Q  19:34and this is your point c times Q  that is scalar multiplication.  19:40So, here is how you do addition.  19:50And we are going to watch this addition.  Thanks to our support team. So, here is your  19:58plane which is parallel to the XY plane.  And now, we take two points on this plane  20:07which we want to add. So, now we draw our  usual vectors and then we project this down.  20:18And now, so now this is in the XY plane. So, in  the XY plane we know how to add, because that  20:23is exactly R2. That is the parallelogram now. So, use the parallelogram law, add them and then  20:32you project the entire thing back to your  original plane that you are working with.  20:38And now the newly obtained point that you can see  over there is the sum. This is the way you add.  20:51So, I hope the video showed to you the geometry  20:55involved in things like addition.  So, now the question is,  21:01so we have defined what is scalar multiplication  and addition on this set. And now, I will leave  21:07you to check that this is a vector space. You  can either do geometrically or better to do it  21:12both ways. So, try to think of geometrically  by visualization why this is a vector space  21:21or you can just write down the algebra and work  out that this is indeed a vector space.  21:27So, in either case, what can help us the  following. So, the idea behind the addition  21:34and scalar multiplication here is that really  you are looking at vectors, we are taking points,  21:42drawing the corresponding vector, but then  remember that you project down. So, this is  21:47essentially what we are doing is, we are  looking at arrows which start at the point  21:54where the z-axis intersects this plane and where  the tip is the point you are interested in.  22:00So, you take those kinds of arrows and then you  do addition and scalar multiplication for those  22:06arrows exactly the way you do it for R2. This  is really at the heart of what is going on.  22:12So, I will leave that visualization to  you and I hope you can see that this is  22:20indeed very similar to what we do in R2. So, let me summarize what we have seen in  22:25this video. So, in this video, we saw, we began by  seeing the some more properties of vector spaces,  22:34in particular, things like how  the 0 vector behaves and how  22:38the negative of a vector behaves and so on.  We saw somewhat real life application of  22:47vector spaces, namely, we took our good old  grocery shop problem and saw how vector spaces  22:55fit into that context and then we have seen  the example of affine flats. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.