---
title: "L8.3: Projections using inner products :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L8.3: Projections using inner products :: IITM Online Degree

L8.3: Projections using inner products

Transcript Language

English

00:15Hello and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the  online BSc degree in Data Science and Programming.  00:24In this video we are going to talk about  projections using inner products. So, we have  00:28seen before what is an inner product space. So,  it is a vector space endowed with an inner product  00:33and we have seen that the dot product or  the Rn is an example of an inner product.  00:38So, in this video we are going to  describe the ideas of taking a projection  00:45using the inner product. So, let us start with a basic  00:48example in R2. So, here is your plane R2. You  have two points A and B and you draw the line  00:56joining A with the origin. So, that is the blue  line in the picture and now we want to find the  01:03nearest point from B on the line passing through  A and the origin. This is what we want to do.  01:10So, this is maybe something that you  have done in high school meaning in your,  01:16I am not even sure seventh or eighth  standard where we do geometry.  01:22We actually do this using the ruler and compass  where we take the compass, place it on B, then you  01:31draw an arc, it intersects the line in two places,  then you take your arc again, you draw, your  01:39compass again, draw two arcs and then you join  this and that sort of, that is the perpendicular  01:47passing through this line and that perpendicular  is actually the shortest distance of B from  01:57this line. This is what, this is an, these are the  idea that we have seen in high school geometry.  02:04So, now I want to do the same thing  using a little bit more sophisticated  02:08machinery. We do not actually want to draw  this we are not interested in drawing it per  02:12say. What we want to do is to determine it, is  there a way of writing down equations I order to  02:20get the shortest distance, is there way to write  down equations to get the nearest point?  02:28So, drop a perpendicular from B onto the line.  You can use the procedure that I just mentioned  02:34in order to do that. So, the procedure  that we have using the compass and so on  02:39that will tell you what the point is; meaning  geometrically you can identify what the point is,  02:45but what we want is, we want to know for example,  what are the coordinate vectors of this point? We  02:50are now, we have enhanced ourselves from  Euclidian geometry to coordinate geometry  02:55and now in fact we are going towards vector  geometry. That is what we are studying now.  03:00So, let us see how to do that. So, now  we introduced vectors. So, this is where  03:07vectors start coming in. So, draw the  vectors corresponding to the points A and B.  03:12Let us call these vectors little a and little b  respectively. And now let us use these vectors in  03:18order to determine what is this point. So, I want  to determine what is this point. So, let us me  03:27highlight that point. It is this point  here. That is the point that we want.  03:32So, let us see how to get that point. So, suppose I know that this angle is theta  03:37or I do not know the angle is theta but I know  the length of this line. If I know the length of  03:46this line, then I am done. Because the point  A is given to me that is, so that mean I can  03:54get the vector a and then what I want to do is, I  can, I want to scale this vector, because this is  04:00the vector corresponding to the point that  I want. I will show that with green.  04:11So, the vector that corresponding to the point  I want, that is this vector here is some scaled  04:17version of A. So, the vector I want, let us  call it v, so v is equal to some alpha times a.  04:24This v is alpha times a. So, all I need to do  is to determine what s alpha and then I can get  04:34what is this point. So, and  what is alpha? Alpha is exactly  04:38going to be determined by this length  in red that we have denoted here.  04:42So, how do I get alpha? So, what we  know is, so suppose this length is  04:49given by, so this is essentially in norm of v; the  distance of v from the origin. So, this is a norm  04:56of v. So, the norm of v is what we want. So, if we  put it into this equation, this is mod of alpha,  05:04but we know that alpha is actually positive,  so we do not need to put the mod, alpha times  05:12norm of a, which means alpha is equal  to norm of v divided by norm of a.  05:19So, in other words, v is equal to norm of v  divided by norm of a times a or in other words,  05:28norm of v times a by norm of a. So, you  can see a by norm of a is a unit vector,  05:34meaning it is a vector of length 1 and then you,  when you multiply in the same direction as a  05:39and then we, when you multiplied by  norm v, you will get exactly v. Fine.  05:43So, now I know a because I know the  point capital A and once I know A,  05:48I can determine what is norm of a. So, what I  really need to know is what is norm of v? And  05:57for norm of v, well we know that norm of v is  06:03equal to the norm of the  vector b times cosine theta.  06:11This is something we know from our Euclidian  geometry or this is the definition of cosine of  06:18an angle. It is the length of the adjacent side  divided by the length of the hypotenuse.  06:26So, I know this is norm of b times cosine of  theta, but now I know what is cosine of theta,  06:31that is exactly where, so, so far  I have only used the lengths, but  06:36I will use the inner product because the cosine  of theta, remember theta is also the angle,  06:41it is not just the angle between b and  v, it is also the angle between b and a.  06:46And so, I can write down cosine of theta as the  inner product of a comma b. I mean, in terms of  06:58the inner product of a comma b. So, this is  a comma b divided by norm of a norm of b.  07:06If I put all of that together, what we are going  to get is that v is equal to norm of v times a by  07:16norm a which is equal to norm of b times inner  product of a comma b by norm of a norm of b,  07:28a times norm of a and these two norm of bs cancel,  so this is inner product of a comma b by norm of  07:36a square times a and I can write this, since I  have a norm of a squared, I can write this as  07:44a comma b, inner product of a comma  b divided by inner product of a comma  07:48a times a. So, that is what we get. So, if you know a and b, well, I know what is this  07:55vector v which is the vector corresponding to the  point that I wanted, that was the nearest point on  08:02this line. So, you can see how we have progressed  from Euclidian geometry to coordinate geometry  08:10to vector geometry which helped us solve the  problem in (vec) in coordinate geometry. And  08:16the point here is that we used the inner product  very crucially to get what we wanted.  08:25So, in this case of course inner  product is just the dot product.  08:28So, when I said inner product here, I mean  the dot product. So, this is ab cosine theta.  08:34I mean, this is, so that is what I used here. So,  a dot b is equal to length of a times length of b  08:48times cosine theta. That is what I used here.  So, this is a rather expansive discussing about  08:55the nearest point. So, let us also recall  what the nearest point tells us in terms of  09:03shadows because that is really  what projections are.  09:06So, suppose there is a light source over here  which is emitting light. It is right on top of  09:12B, on top in the sense of this perpendicular  and if you have the light coming out like this,  09:19then the shadow of this vector is going  to fall exactly where the green line is  09:27on v. So, this is what a projection does. It takes  something and projects it down to something else.  09:36It is as if there is a light source behind. And when we do a usual inner products and usual  09:42lengths and so on, then that means  it is perpendicular, it is like  09:48the shadow is falling exactly perpendicular to  what is below. But we will see things which are  09:56not like that also and there we will actually have  to use inner products, the dot products would not  10:00be helpful. That is what this video is about. Let us quickly look at the example with the same  10:07idea. So, here we have a vector b in R3 that  is the vector in red and we want to find  10:13the nearest point to b, this is not of, this  should have been to, so the nearest point to b  10:25on the two dimensional plane generated by  the vectors 1, 0, 0 and 0, 1, 0 that is the  10:30xy plane. So, what you do, you drop a  perpendicular, again the same idea and then  10:36that point is exactly the point which is closest.  So, this point here is the closest point.  10:43And how would I determine this point  now? So, to determine this point,  10:47again you would go through the same ideas that  we did before. So, we would consider this angle,  10:54this angle is theta and then you would work out  the same, work it out in the same way. Except here  11:02we do not have an a. So, instead of a would have  to use the vectors 1, 0, 0 and 0, 1, 0 and we will  11:08see explicitly how to do that in a few minutes.  The idea is going to be the same, we have to use  11:19the dot product and the lengths  in a very effective way.  11:25So, let us go ahead. What is a projection  of a vector to a subspace? So, we have seen  11:31two examples of taking this idea of shadows  and now let us do a general definition and  11:37we will see that the particular case of Rn with  the usual the dot product and so on gives you  11:44the shadow that we just saw  in the previous examples.  11:47So, let V be an inner product space, you  have a vector v, you have a subspace W.  11:53Then the projection of v onto W is the vector  in W denoted by projection of v subscript w  12:01computed as follows and I want to underline  that I am saying computed and not defined.  12:06Find an orthonormal basis v1, v2, vn for W.  Define the projection as summation v comma vi  12:14times vi. So, now what happened here? Well, we took an orthonormal basis  12:23which is why we did not have to divide by  anything. In our first example, remember we had  12:27to divide by something, so the inner product of a  with itself, so the norm of a squared, but since  12:36here our basis vectors are of length 1, we do  not have to do that. Here, length means norm. So,  12:42here you just take the inner product of v  with vi and multiply that number with vi  12:48and that is the projection of v onto W. You might identify this with something we saw  12:56in our previous video. So, here is the main fact  which is why I said computed, did not defined.  13:01The definition is independent or I should have  said that expression is independent of the  13:06chosen orthonormal basis. What does that mean? The  expression on the right hand side does not change.  13:12So, when I say the expression that  means this expression here.  13:19This expression does not change even if  you chose a different orthonormal basis.  13:24So, if I choose v1, v2, vn and you choose  13:31w1, w2, wn, then, even then, this will not change.  So, the projection of v onto W is the vector in W  13:42closest to v. And what do we mean by closest?  So, note that closest is in terms of the distance  13:50based on the norm induced by the  inner product. So, what we mean is  13:54that if you take the smallest value of v minus w  14:06so find w in W such that this  norm is smallest, the answer is  14:21w is equal to projection of v onto W. That  is what we mean by the smallest distance.  14:30And here, what do we mean by distance, because  distance is inner product space, there is no  14:36natural, I mean there is no distance in the same  sense of length that we have done for Rn. Here  14:45distance means the norm, distance means norm. So,  in terms of the norm, this is the smallest.  14:52Let us do examples. The, so I believe the previous  definition we have little intimidating. So,  15:00let us do some examples. So, V be R2 and  let W be the subspace generated by 3 comma 1  15:07and let v be 1 comma 3, then the  projection of v onto W is 1.8 comma 0.6.  15:17Similarly, if v is R3 and W is the subspace  generated by 1, 0, 0 and 0, 1, 0 so that is  15:24the xy plane. And you take v to be 2, 3, 5,  then the projection of v onto W is 2, 3, 0.  15:31Let us work out these examples and  it will make it clearer what we mean.  15:35First of all you have to identify an orthonormal  basis for the vector space at w at hand. So, here  15:45if you take 3 comma 1 and divide it by root  10, so this is an orthonormal basis for W. Now,  15:56let us take v and then by definition you have  to take v comma this 1 by root 10, 3 comma 1  16:10and multiply it by the basis vector.  This whatever value you get, you multiply  16:17it to the basis vector. This is 3  comma 1 and this is the projection.  16:26So, let us compute what that is. So, if you  take this inner product, you get, so this is  16:30inner product of 1 comma 3, I can take that 1 by  root 10 out and I have 1 by root 10 again here,  16:37so I get 1 by 10 3 comma 1 and this  inner product is 1 times 3 plus 3 times 1  16:51by 10 3 comma 1. So, this is 6 by 10 3 comma  1 and now if you multiply you get 1.8 comma  17:040.6. So, this is exactly  what we add over here.  17:08Similarly, here, where in this case the,  you have an orthonormal basis given.  17:15So, the, this is the standard vectors, standard  basis vectors, so this is our orthonormal basis.  17:25So, now what is the projection?  17:30So, this is the inner product of 1, 0,  0 or let us write that on the other side  17:392, 3, 5 comma 1, 0, 0 multiply it to 1, 0, 0 plus  2, 3, 5 comma 0, 1, 0 multiply it to 0, 1, 0.  17:58So, if you take this inner product, you get 2. So,  this is 2 times 1 comma 0 comma 0 and if you take  18:04this inner product, you get 3. So, this is 3 comma  0 comma 0. So, you get 2 comma 3 comma 0.  18:12So, this is exactly what you expect. If you have a  vector like this and you take its projection onto  18:17the xy plane, that vector will have Z coordinate  0, but the x and y coordinate do not change and  18:25that is exactly what you are getting here.  That is exactly the picture that we saw in  18:29our second example. So, the projection indeed  does maintain, does do what we expect it to do.  18:36I mean, this definition that would have  does indeed do what we expect it to do  18:41for the usual Euclidian geometry. Let us now ask what happens if instead  18:51of an orthonormal basis you have orthogonal bases.  We already saw in the previous example that we had  19:00I think it was 3 comma 1, so we converted it  into an orthonormal bases and then we applied the  19:09definition and that is what  you can do here as well.  19:12So, first of all let us define what is projection  of a vector. So, let V be an inner product space  19:19and v and w be vectors in V. Define the projection  of v on W. So, now this w remember is a vector is  19:27projection of the subspace generated by w, so you  take projection of v onto the subspace generated  19:33by w. So, how do we find this? Well, you take your  little w and your little w is a basis vector for  19:47the subspace it generates and  you divide it by its norm,  19:50so that will give you have orthonormal basis.  19:52There is only basis vector here, so there  is no question of orthogonality. So,  19:56the only thing you have to ensure is that the norm  is 1 which you can do by dividing by its norm.  20:02Now, I should point out that if it so happens that  w is 0, then you do not have to do all of this.  20:10The projection is just defined to be 0  because there is nothing else you can do.  20:15So, assuming it is non-zero  you can divide by its norm.  20:19So, once you divide by its norm, you get w by  norm of w which is an orthonormal basis for  20:25the subspace generated by w. And now you can  take the projection. So, the projection of v  20:32on W is by definition v comma inner  product of v comma w by norm w times  20:39w by norm w, which if you work out, this is what  we did in our previous example or as also in the  20:47first example with R2; the beginning. So, here we get the inner product of v comma w,  20:55you can take the norm out and you get a square  of the norm in the denominator from the two norms  21:00and then you can write it as v, inner product of  v comma w divide it by norm of w comma w times w.  21:08So, this is the expression we got right at the  beginning in the first slide of this video.  21:14So, now we can expand this, if you  have v1, v2, vn as an orthonormal,  21:18orthogonal basis for a subspace W, then you  can divide each of them by their norms and  21:22that will give you an orthonormal basis, this  is what we have seen in the previous video  21:29and that is why if you take the projection, that  means you are taking the projection with each of  21:34those vi by norm vi and then multi, the inner  product with each vi comma norm vi, multiplying  21:40by vi by norm vi and taking the sum. And if you work it out that means you get  21:46summation v comma, inner product of v comma  vi times inner product, divide it by v inner  21:52product of vi comma vi and here there is a  typo, this should be times vi and then this  22:01thing here is exactly what we call the projection  of v on vi. So, you can write it as the sum of  22:07projection of v on vi. So, the, so if you  have an orthogonal basis, projection of v  22:14on W you can just write it as a sum of the  projections on each of the basis vectors.  22:20So, that is the upshot of this argument here. So, let us do an example.  22:25So, let W be the two-dimensional subspace of V  is R3 spanned byt orthogonal vectors 1, 2, 1 and  22:321, minus 1, 1. By the way you do not have to take  my word that these are orthogonal. You can take  22:39the inner product, I should also again remind  you that if no inner product is specified, then  22:45by default it is the standard inner product on for  Rn. So, here that means it is a dot product. So,  22:50if you take the dot product, you get 1, minus 2,  plus 1 which is 0. So, these are orthogonal.  22:56So, what is the projection of v is minus 2, 2,  2 on W? We find out each of these individual  23:03projections. So, the projection of v on v1 is by  definition as we saw, inner product v comma v1  23:10divided by v, inner product v1 v1 times v1 which  if you work out gives you two-thirds 1, 2, 1.  23:20So, the numerator is minus 2, plus 4, plus 2.  So, minus 2, plus 4, plus 2 is just 4 and the  23:29denominator is 1 plus 4 plus 1, so that is 6, so  4 by 6 times 1, 2, 1. So, that is what we want.  23:38Similarly, if you do it for v2, the numerator  is minus 2, minus 2 plus 2. So, that is minus 2,  23:48and the denominator is 1 plus 1 plus 1 so that is  3, so you get minus two-thirds times 1 minus 1,  23:541 and now the projection of v on W meaning the  subspace is where you add these projections up,  24:03so that is given by, so this should  not be a capital, this was a small,  24:10so that is two-third 1, 2, 1 minus  two-third 1, minus 1, 1 which gives you  24:19two-third times 2 plus 1 in the second  coordinate and 0s in the other coordinates,  24:25so that gives you 0, 2, 0. So, that is  the projection of v on this subspace W.  24:36Fine. So, at the end let us talk about projection  as a linear transformation. So, we have studied  24:41the notion of a linear transformation. So, let  V be a inner product space and W be a subspace,  24:47then the projection of vectors in V to W is a  linear transformation from V to V with image W.  24:53So, what do we mean by this?  24:56Let us study that in a second. Before that let us  remark that we denote this linear transformation  25:03as Pw. What is Pw? Let us see what is Pw? So, Pw of v we are saying is defined as  25:11projection of v on W. This is Pw of v. And what do  we need for a linear transformation to work, for  25:21this to be linear transformation we need that if  you take two vectors v1 and v2, this is Pw of v1  25:32plus Pw of v2 and we need if you take Pw  of some constant times v, you get c times  25:41Pw of v. If we know these two, then this is the  definition of Pw being a linear transformation.  25:48So, given a v, we get a new vector in v which  is the projection vector and the actually this  25:56vector is in W, so it has image W that is what  this is saying. So, let us maybe quickly run  26:04through these proofs. So, the idea here is the  following, we chose an orthogonal basis, so choose  26:12orthogonal basis, let us say w1 through wn for  W, then by definition this thing on the left is  26:28summation, we just saw this. This is summation of,  26:33well, first of all by definition  this is projection of v1 plus v2 on W  26:40which we just saw was the projection,  the sum of the projections on each wi,  26:54but what is this? By definition this is the inner  product of v1 plus v2 comma wi times wi and then  27:05sum 1 through n, but then you can make this into  two different terms v1 comma wi times wi plus  27:22v2 comma wi, this is v1 comma wi so  times wi and this is exactly this term,  27:31this is exactly this term. So, that is why the  27:36projection of v1 plus v2 is the  projection of v1 plus projection of v2  27:41and how about the other the other part? So, Pw  of cv by definition is projection of cv on W  27:53which again by definition is summation i is  1 through n, so I will directly write this  28:00point this is cv comma wi times wi, you can take  the c out and then you can remove it all the way  28:09out of the sum as well. This c times summation v  comma wi times wi, what which is exactly this.  28:17So, that is the proof that it is indeed a linear  transformation. So, what are we saying really,  28:22I mean if you think carefully of what  we are saying, it is the following:  28:25the projection is some kind of taking shadows,  so this is saying if the length of your vector  28:31is larger, then the shadow is equivalently  larger. This is, this makes perfect sense.  28:36That is what this second part is saying. And the other part is saying if you take the  28:41sums of two vectors, then the resultant  vector, you take its shadow, instead if  28:48you take the shadows first and then take the  sum, you will get the shadow of the result  28:54vector. This again, you think a little about the  parallelogram law, this makes perfect sense. So,  29:00anyway I have proved it, but this is not I mean  even geometrically this is very natural.  29:09Let us quickly look at a few properties of this  projection Pw. So, this is a linear transformation  29:17and some of these properties actually characterise  it, but I will not expand on what that means.  29:23So, first of all if your v belongs to W, then  Pw of v is v. Why is that? That is exactly the  29:29formula we saw in the previous video, I will come  back to this point at the end of this slide.  29:34Range of Pw is W that is what we said the  image of Pw is W maybe I should, this is  29:41range maybe was not the word we use, we use the  word image. That follows from the first point.  29:51So, let us define this set called W perp. So, it  is the set of those vectors such that when you  29:58take the inner product of such a vector with  any element of any vector in W you get 0.  30:04So, for example, if you have the usual inner  product and on R2 and you take the x axis,  30:10then the perp is the y axis. So, then, so this  is true we can define this for any inner product  30:18space, so w perp is the set such so defined. And  it turns out that this is the null space of Pw  30:28and it if you look at this definition carefully,  it will take you a minute to prove that.  30:35Pw squared is Pw, what does this mean?  I will come back to this at the end of  30:41the slide and finally norm of Pw of v is  less than or equal to the norm of the v.  30:47Very intuitive because if you take something  like this and you are taking its shadow, you  30:51are saying that the shadow has smaller length. And  now you have to understand here that the length is  30:58if you take a projection in the usual sense in the  perpendicular sense, then this is clear. But if  31:04you take your light source elsewhere, then you  remember that your norm is also different.  31:10So, that is why even if you take it  here, you could have a very long shadow,  31:15but you are computing length in a different  way, so this will still be satisfied. This  31:20was a slightly tricky part, I will not expand  on this because we probably do not need it  31:26in this course, but those of you who feel  like this is interesting should think of it.  31:31Let me come back to this part about the image.  31:35So, first of all this is called the image. Why is  Pw of v equal to v? Well, what is the definition,  31:40choose an orthonormal basis, so this is  an orthonormal basis and then look at  31:50v comma wi times wi and sum over i. Now, if v is  in W, so if v is in W, then v is summation ci wi  32:05because wis form a basis. But then what is the ci?  We saw in the previous video that these cis are  32:11exactly these inner products, so the ci is exactly  the inner product v comma wi. So, this is equal  32:22to v. That means v is equal to the projection  of v on W if v is already a element of W.  32:32Now this makes perfect sense if you  already have a vector which is in your  32:39vector space, the nearest vector to this  will be itself because it is at distance 0,  32:44so this is perfectly logical and indeed we have  proved it. So, because of this the image is W,  32:52as I said the third point you should sit down  and check, it will take you a minute.  32:56What is the meaning of Pw squared is Pw? This  is not actually Pw squared, what would mean  33:01by Pw squared is Pw composed Pw. What that  means is if you take Pw and apply it to v,  33:09and then this is again a vector of v and  then you apply it again to this. Well, but  33:16this you know Pw of v is already inside W, so  Pw of anything inside W is already itself. So,  33:23that is why it is Pw of v. So, that explains  the forth one. Fifth one I will, I have already  33:30given some intuitive explanations, but maybe  I will not expand on this. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.