---
title: "L5.2: The null space of a matrix : finding nullity and a basis - Part 2 :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L5.2: The null space of a matrix : finding nullity and a basis - Part 2 :: IITM Online Degree

L5.2: The null space of a matrix : finding nullity and a basis - Part 2

Transcript Language

English

00:13Transcriber's Name: Crescendo  Transcription Pvt. Ltd.  00:14Mathematics for Data Science - 2 Professor Sarang Sane  00:14Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras  00:14The null space of a matrix finding  nullity and a basis - Part 2  00:14So, let us do a three by four example. So, here  your matrix is 1, 2, 0, 3, 2, 3, 0, 3 and 1, 1,  00:231, 2. So, in this example what do we want  to do? We want to get what is the nullity  00:33and a basis for the null space. That is what we  want to do. So, the augmented matrix is this.  00:42So, let us see what row reduction yields.  So, row reduction is going to give me  00:471, 2, 0, 3, 2, 3, 0, 3, 1, 1, 1, 2. I wrote that  matrix. And as I commented in my previous slide,  00:54I am going to drop the augmented part. So, if we do that, we have swept out our first  01:01column, everything below that one. Now, let us  continue with the process. So, we get, we want a 1  01:09in the 2, 2th place if possible. And indeed,  we can multiply the second row by minus  01:141 and obtain that. So, we get 0, 1, 0, 3 in the  second row, everything else remains the same.  01:23So, let us continue the process. This is  the same matrix we had in the previous  01:26slide. So, now, let us sweep  everything below the second,  01:31in the second column below the 1. So, if you do  that, we get 1, 2, 0, 3, 0, 1, 0, 3, 0, 0, 1, 2.  01:42And this is already been reduced, not  reduced in the row echelon form. But  01:48we can go ahead one step and do reduced row  echelon form. And if we do that, we get 1,  01:530, 0 minus 3, 0, 1, 0, 3, 0, 0, 1, 2. So, we have reached our matrix which is the  02:02reduced row echelon form. Now, let us ask what  are the dependent and independent variables.  02:07The leading ones are in the first, second and  third column that means x1, x2, x3 are dependent  02:11variables. That means x4 is an independent  variable. So, the independent variable is x4,  02:18dependent variables are x1, x2, x3. So, the  nullity of A is 1 right the nullity of A is 1,  02:28because the nullity corresponds to the  number of independent variables.  02:34And what is the null space of A? So, for the null  space, we put the independent variables to be the  02:43tis. In this case, there is only one independent  variable. So, instead of putting t1 I have put,  02:47just called it t. So, put x4 equals t. So,  the equations from the row reduced echelon  02:53form are x1 minus 3x4 is 0. So, here I am using  the augmented matrix. So, I have this matrix 1,  03:020, 0, minus 3, 0, 1, 0, 3 and 0, 0, 1, 2.  And I am using the augmented matrix.  03:09So, if I call this R, I am using the  augmented matrix R0. And from there,  03:15I am getting these equations. So, I get  x1 minus 3x4 is 0, x2 plus 3x4 is 0,  03:24and x3 plus 2x4 is 0. So, from here we get that x1  must be 3t by putting x4 as t, x1 must be 3t, x2  03:33is minus 3t and x3 is actually minus 2t. So, now  we know what is the general form of a solution.  03:40It is of the form, so 3t, minus 3t, minus 2t  and t and t varies over R. So, some possible  03:48solutions are given by, let us say, if you put  t equals 5, you get 15 comma minus 15 comma  03:57minus 10 comma 5 or if you put a t equals 100, you  get 300 comma minus 300 comma minus 200 comma 100  04:08or you could of course put t equals  0 also. That is also a solution.  04:11That is the trivial solution, 0, 0, 0, 0. So, actually, other than the last one the 0,  04:180, 0, 0, any of these we could have chosen as  a basis vector. But just to follow a procedure,  04:26we put t equals 1. So, t equals 1 yields a basis  vector, 3, minus 3, minus 2, 1. So, a basis  04:33for the null space of this matrix is just a  single basis vector 3, minus 3, minus 2, 1.  04:43So, you can check that this is actually inside  your null space by multiplying this to A  04:51on the right of course as a column  and seeing that the result is 0.  04:58Fine so, we have done these two examples of  05:02computing the nullity of a matrix and  the null space of a matrix and its  05:08basis. So, now let us take a step back and and and  ask what did we exactly do? So, we found a general  05:19solution for the system of linear equations  Ax equals 0. And then we put the ti s to be  05:281 and everything, all other tj s  to be 0 and each such will give you  05:34a basis vector. This is the  main point, the main idea.  05:39Fine so, let us do some observations and these  observations are going to yield a theorem,  05:46which is called the rank nullity theorem.  05:49So, what is the rank nullity theorem?  So, let A be an m by n matrix.  05:54So, recall that the row rank of A is the dimension  of the row space of A and the column rank of A is  05:59the dimension of the column space of A. So, what do we mean by the row space of A?  06:04It is the vector space or the subspace  of Rn if it is an m by n matrix of Rn,  06:12which is spanned by the rows of A, which we treat  as vectors. And what is the column space of A? It  06:21is a subspace, it is the subspace of Rm which is  given as the span of the columns of A, meaning  06:31you treat each column as a vector in Rm and that  span is going to give you the column space.  06:39So, recall that these are equal. This is  something I stated, but did not prove and  06:44they are denoted by rank of A. So, the rank of  A is any one of these two, either the row rank  06:50or the column rank, because they are both the  same. So, we used in a previous video, we used  07:00the fact that rank of A is the same as the row  rank to compute this rank. How did we do that?  07:07We said, you take this matrix A, you do row  reduction, and once you do row reduction, you  07:13look at the non-zero rows of this matrix. And the  number of non-zero rows is exactly the rank of A.  07:22So, recall this if you do not remember. So, now  this is an important point. So, note that for  07:31a matrix R in the row echelon form, so suppose  you have a matrix which is in row echelon form,  07:36the number of non-zero rows is the same  as the number of dependent variables.  07:43How do we get this? Each non-zero row has a  leading one, because it is in row echelon form.  07:50And each leading one that corresponding  column corresponds to a dependent variable.  07:56So, the non-zero rows correspond to the leading  ones correspond to the columns with leading ones  08:07correspond to the dependent variables.  That is how this correspondence is. So,  08:12the number of non-zero rows is the same  as the number of dependent variables.  08:18Of course, dependent variables were, because we  there is no system of equations in this place. So,  08:23as I said, here you think of the, in your mind,  you think of the system of linear, the homogeneous  08:29system of linear equations, Rx equals 0. So,  you have this matrix A, you row reduce it to R,  08:36think of the system of equations Rx equals 0,  think of how many dependent variables there are,  08:43that is exactly the same as the number of  non-zero rows. That is what we are saying.  08:48And what is the number of non-zero rows? That is the same as the rank of the matrix A.  08:55Why is that the case by the way, because remember  that in the previous video we have seen that,  09:00if you have a spanning set for vector space,  you put those in into your matrix as rows.  09:08But in this case, we have already done that.  That matrix is by construction that we started  09:16with the rows are the vectors which span the row  space. So, that is how we obtain the statement.  09:24So, the moral of the story is, the rank of A is  the number of non-zero rows of R, R was remember  09:31obtained as, from A by doing row reduction, which  is the number of dependent variables of Rx is 0.  09:40How is this related to nullity? Remember that  the nullity of A is the number of independent  09:47variables of Rx is 0. So, rank is  the number of dependent variables,  09:53nullity is the number of independent variables. But well, if you have a variable either it is a  09:59dependent variable or an independent variables,  so the number of dependent variables plus the  10:06number of independent variables is the total  number of variables which is exactly n,  10:11remember, it is an m by n matrix. So,  this gives us the rank nullity theorem  10:16that the rank of A plus the nullity of A is n. Why, because the rank is a number of  10:21dependent variables and the nullity is a number  of independent variables and we just saw that  10:26the sum is the total number of  variables which is n. So, this is a  10:33heuristic proof of the, or I let me remove the  word proof, this is a heuristic for this theorem.  10:42So, this is a useful and and often  quoted theorem in linear algebra.  10:48So, with that, let us do the final topic that we  want to do in this video. How do we check if a set  10:56of n vectors is a basis for Rn? So, remember  that for Rn we have a standard basis. Namely,  11:04the eis which is 1 in the i-th place,  i-th coordinate and 0 is everywhere else.  11:10This is the standard basis for Rn. And we  know that the size of any basis is the same.  11:15So, the, that was what we had called dimension.  So, we know that the dimension of Rn is n.  11:21So, we know that if at all you have a  basis it must consist of n vectors. So,  11:26now suppose we are given n vectors, how  do I check whether or not this is a basis?  11:32So, here, we use the idea from a previous  11:37video about linear independence and dependence.  Namely, that if you have a set of vectors and you  11:42want to check whether or not they are linearly  independent, so if you have, for example,  11:48n vectors in Rn, you look at the determinant  and that is exactly what we are going to do now.  11:55So, that will that will tell you whether  or not they are linearly independent.  11:59But then the point is if you have, if they  are independent, when you have n linearly  12:04independent vectors and they must form a basis,  because if not, once there will be some vector  12:10which is not in the span of these vectors which  is linearly independent so you add that, and you  12:15can keep doing this process as we did. And in  the end you, after appending a bunch of vectors,  12:20you will get a basis. But then remember that the  dimension will be strictly bigger than n.  12:26So, the only way that this is possible is  if your original set was itself a basis. So,  12:33what is the moral? The upshot is that if you  have n vectors, it is enough to check that  12:40they are linearly independent. Other way of  doing this is to say it is enough to check  12:45that there are a spanning set. In either of  these two cases, there must be a basis.  12:52So, how do I check that in this case? In this  case, it so happens that since you have n and n,  12:59the corresponding matrix is a square  matrix and I can look for its determinant.  13:05So, let us let us see how to check this. So,  the short answer is use determinants. And I  13:11sketched out how. Suppose we are given n vectors  of Rn, we write them as columns of a matrix.  13:17So, we will obtain an n by n square matrix.  13:22If the determinant of the matrix is 0, then  the given set of vectors does not form a basis,  13:27otherwise it forms a basis. So, what it saying  is that in a very large number of cases,  13:34almost always, which has a precise meaning, but  we would not say what that is now, almost always,  13:42they do form a basis. So, what do you have to do  to check? You have to compute its determinant.  13:48So, let us do examples. The quick examples  are in R2, you take the standard basis, 1,  13:540, and 0, 1. We already know it is a basis. So,  let us just check that the statement is correct.  13:58So, what is the corresponding  matrix? It is the identity matrix.  14:02The determinant is 1. And indeed, this forms  a basis. So, the determinant is non-zero.  14:07And let us look at the vectors let  us say 1, minus 2 and 5, minus 10.  14:11So, this yields a matrix 1, minus 2 in the  first column, 5, minus 10 in the second column.  14:17And if you look at its determinant, it is  0. Of course, we know this, because they are  14:22linear multiples of each other. And as a  result, this is not linearly independent  14:27and so it cannot form a basis. Let us do this for a slightly more  14:35larger example and maybe a more involved example.  So, is the set 1, 2, 3, 0, 1, 2, 1, 3, 0 a basis  14:42for R3? Let us form the matrix. So, form a matrix  A with columns given by these vectors, so that is,  14:51the first column is 1, 2, 3, the second column  is 0, 1, 2, the third column is 1, 3, 0.  14:56Let us find its determinant.  Well, we know how to do this.  14:59So, I am, I have just directly done this. So,  it is 1 times minus 6, minus 0 times minus 9,  15:07which will anyway does not count, plus 1  times 4 minus 3. So, that is minus 6 plus 0  15:15plus 1, which is minus 5, and that is non-zero.  So, this does give you a set of vectors which form  15:22a basis. Let me directly show you that this is  indeed a basis by proving that this is a spanning  15:30set for R3. So, let B belong to R3. So, I want to get a bunch of scalars  15:37such that a1 times, if I call these vectors x1,  x2, x3, so this is x1, this is x2, this is x3.  15:48So, I want to get, so need a1, a2, a3 belonging  to R such that summation aixi is B. I want this.  16:04So, in other words, I want to solve A times  a1, a2, a3 is equal to B. Why is that,  16:14because the first column remember is 1, 2, 3,  which corresponds to x1, the second column is  16:220, 1, 2, which corresponds to x2 and the third  column is 1, 3, 0, which corresponds to x3.  16:28So, if you write out this equation in terms of the  columns, you will exactly have a1x1 plus a2x2 plus  16:34a3x3. So, we want to solve this for a1,  a2, a3. But now we know A is invertible.  16:41So, we know a solution. In fact, there is  a unique solution. So, unique solution is  16:52a1, a2, a3 is equal to A inverse b. And why do  we, I mean, where am I getting A inverse from,  16:59well, because the determinant is  non-zero. So, the inverse exists.  17:04In fact, we know explicitly how to compute  it. The point is that there is a solution. So,  17:10that means a1, a2, a3 exists.  So, scalars a1, a2, a3 exists  17:14such that summation aixi is equal to B for any  B in R3. That means it is a spanning set for R3.  17:21Already, the fact that determinant is  non-zero tells you it is linearly independent  17:24that means it is a basis. So, that is why it  is enough to check for the determinant.  17:30Let us do one last example in R4. So, let us have  these four vectors 1, 2, 3, 0, 0, 1, 2, 1, 1, 3,  17:380, 2, 2, 6, 5, 3 is this a basis for R4? What do  I do? I make the matrix with these columns. Put  17:46these vectors in the columns. So, in the first  column, I have 1, 2, 3, 0. In the second column,  17:50I have 0, 1, 2, 1. In the third column, I have  1, 3, 0, 2. In the fourth column, I have 2, 6, 5,  17:553\. Compute its determinant. We know  how to compute determinants.  17:59The, we will do this by, well, the easiest way  would have been by doing Gaussian elimination  18:05or row reduction rather, but let  me do it by hand. So, by hand,  18:10let us do it by expansion along the first row. So,  I get 1 times the determinant of the 1, 1 minor,  18:22minus 0 times the 1, 2 minor, plus 1 times the  1, 3 minor, minus 2 times the 1, 4 minor. So,  18:34the 0 times part I have removed, because anyway I  am going to get the, that will contribute nothing  18:42and the rest are written down here. So, you can compute this. The first term is 11,  18:47second is 0, so I have removed it altogether, the  third term is 11 and the fourth term is 2 times 11  18:54and so this is 0. And as a result, the given  set of vectors do not form a basis of R4.  19:01Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.