---
title: "L5.4: What is a linear mapping - Part 2 :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L5.4: What is a linear mapping - Part 2 :: IITM Online Degree

L5.4: What is a linear mapping - Part 2

Transcript Language

English

00:14Transcriber's Name: Crescendo Transcriptions Pvt Ltd00:15Mathematics of Data Science 2 Professor Sarang Sane00:16Department of Mathematics Indian Institute of Technology, Madras00:17What is a linear mapping Part 200:18Let us move on to a slightly more elaborate example. So, we will use the same data that00:20we have before, we have shop A. But now in this locality Malgudi, on this town Malgudi,00:29we have the original shop A, and we have two other shops B and C as well, and the prices00:35of rice, dal and oil in each of the shops is given in this table.00:40So, in Shop A we already have seen that it is 45 kgs, 45 rupees per kg for rice, 12500:45rupees per kg for a dal and I think 150 rupees per liter for oil. And for Shop B we have00:5940, 120 and 170 respectively and Shop C we have 50, 130 and 160 respectively.01:07Now, someone asked the caterer why do you always buy from shop A? So, is there a good01:16way of deciding, which shop to buy your groceries from? So, in order to do this, what do we01:24have to do, we have to check out the cost for buying X1 kgs of rice, X2 kgs of dal and01:31X3 liters of oil from each of the shops, then compare them and see which one is less, and01:37then we would go there. Of course, let us assume that all of them have the same quality01:41and there is no difference as such.01:43So, let us do that. So, we have seen already that the expression for shop A is a linear01:49combination, and we can, in fact view it as a function. That is what we saw in a few slides01:56ago, and we can also think of it as matrix multiplication. Just to remind you, we had02:01this thing called cA, which was the function, which was this linear combination 45x1 plus02:06125x2 plus 150x3 three, and which we can also write as a matrix multiplication.02:13So similarly, for shops B and C, we can write the cost function cB and cC. So, the shop02:22is capital C and the cost is little c. And expressions and matrix forms are as below.02:30So, CB is the linear combination 40x1 plus 120x2 plus 170x3 and that is the corresponding02:40matrix multiplication. And for shop C, we have the function CC, which is 50x1 plus 130x202:48plus 160x3 and the corresponding matrix multiplication.02:56So, to compare these expressions, let us go back for a second and check them out. We had03:0545x1 plus 125x2 plus 150x3, 40x1 plus 120x2 plus 170x3. So, rice and dal are cheaper in03:15B than in a, but oil is more expensive. And then we have 50x1 plus 130x2 plus 160x3. So,03:25rice and dal in C are more expensive than in shop B, but oil is less expensive.03:35However, when you compare it with shop A, all three are more expensive for shop C. So,03:44you would, assuming everything else is the same you would always prefer shop C, shop03:49A over shop C. So that is what we see here.03:54The third expression always yields larger values than the first one. Of course, we are04:01talking about commodities, so we think of them as buying the, I mean, buying commodities04:09from a grocery shop. So X1, X2, X3 are always I think of them as positive numbers, but we04:14do not know how to compare between the second shop that is shop B and shops A and C.04:21So, to compare this, we would want to compare these cost functions. So, the idea you would04:31I mean, the natural way of doing this would be to treat them together cA, cB and cC we04:38could think of them as a vector. So, you look at this vector, cA, cB, cC and then we can04:45think of this actually as a function. Because each of these, after all are functions from04:49R3 to R, so this vector can be thought of as an element of R3, it is a point of R3.04:55So, we can think of the cost function which is C of X1, X2, X3 is cA of X1, X2, X3 comma05:07cB of X1, X2, X3 comma cC of X1, X2, X3, I will just put this bracket here. And just05:15to recall each of these are given by linear expressions, linear combinations 45x1 plus05:22125x2 plus 150x3 and then 40x1 plus 120x2 plus 170x3 and then 50x1 plus 130x2 plus 160x3.05:30So, this is the function, the cost function, wherein05:40the first coordinate of the cost function tells you the cost in shop A, the second coordinate05:46tells you in shop B, and the third coordinate tells you in shop C. And now, when you are05:50given X1, X2, X3 you put it into this cost function, look at these three numbers that05:55it produces and then you choose the smallest one, you can just read them off. So, this06:01would be a good way of trying to compare. Of course, there are many other reasons to06:09look at the cost function.06:11For example, we can treat this as matrix multiplication. Because after all each of these are given06:19by matrix multiplication, where we have a column vector X1, X2, X3 on the right and06:25a row vector corresponding to the cost of individual items on the left. So, you can06:34put these three row vectors together and get this matrix.06:38So, C of X1, X2, X3 has a matrix form where the matrix is 45, 125, 150. This was the prices06:47for shop A, 40, 120, 170, which are the prices for shop B and for 50, 130, 160, which are06:53the costs for shop C. So, this is exactly what your table was the cost table, a few07:03slides ago. And you can see by just multiplying out that this is indeed what the cost vector07:07is.07:09So, just as an example, the cost of buying 2 kgs of rice, 1 kg of dal and 2 liters of07:15oil are given by the cost vector, you put X1 is 2, X2 is 1 and X3 is 2 and we will get07:24515, 540 and 550, if hopefully I have done this computation correctly.07:32So as in the case of the function cA, the property of linearity of costs can now be07:37extracted from the matrix form for the cost function c. So, let us first of all understand07:42this statement. What do we mean by the statement, the statement means that if you buy, so suppose07:51again, we had a situation like Monday and Tuesday, and then we had a say we wanted to07:57know what the costs for each shop on Wednesday are, so I would be evaluating this on half08:04times the rice on Monday, plus 5 by 4 times rice on Tuesday comma halftimes rice, dal08:26excuse me, dal on Monday plus 5 by 4 times dal on Tuesday, and then half times oil on08:44Monday plus 5 by 4 times oil on Tuesday.08:53You would be evaluating it on this, which means you have this matrix. Well, let me come09:01to the matrix in a second, which means basically you are doing cA of the same thing, cB of09:06the same thing and cC of the same thing, but we saw that cA is basically after we finished09:15the computations the cA of this is exactly half times cA on Monday. So, I will just call09:23it Monday.09:24By Monday, what do I mean? I mean rice on Monday, the vector rice on Monday, dal on09:30Monday comma oil on Monday, plus 5 by 4 times cA on Tuesday, which means by T I mean the09:42vector rice on Tuesday, dal on Tuesday, oil on Tuesday. And then I can, the same way as09:49I did for cA the same. There is nothing special about the shop A. So, the same thing works09:54for cB as well and for cC as well.09:58So, I have this very nice expression, and then half times cC of Monday plus 5 by 4 times10:21cC on Tuesday. And so, I can effectively compute this by computing everything on Monday and10:31Tuesday, but it gets even better because we know how to do matrix. We know how to do,10:36how to add and subtract and scalar multiply things in R3.10:41So, because we can do that, we can write this in even better as half times the cost vector10:49evaluated on the commodities for Monday, plus 5 by 4 times the cost vector evaluated on10:58the vector for Tuesday. I can separate these into two different vectors, and then I can11:03pull out the scalars, I will encourage you to do that. I will just, just in case it was11:09confusing what is M. By M I meant rice on Monday then dal on Monday, oil on Monday.11:22And by T I meant rice on Tuesday, dal on Tuesday, oil on Tuesday.11:31So, notice, I do not even remember what the quantity is there. I did not need that anywhere.11:39So, I can instead replace this rice and dal and so on by variables. I could have called11:45them X1, X2, X3 and Y1, Y2, Y3 and the whole thing would have worked out in the same way.11:50So effectively, what we are saying by linearity is that if you have alpha times X1, X2, X312:00plus Y1, Y2, Y3 this is going to be just alpha times C of X1, X2, X3 plus C of Y1, Y2, Y3.12:13That is what we mean by linearity.12:16This is a very important property, and this is very special to the kind of functions that12:25we are dealing with, they are linear functions. So that is what this video was about. Remember,12:29linear mapping. These are examples of linear mappings. Now, the claim is this can be, we12:35could have done this in one shot by using the matrix. How is that? Because remember12:40that, so let me just take here.12:44So, I can write this as the matrix times the vector X1, X alpha times X1, X2, X3 plus the12:53vector Y1, Y2, Y3. But we know that matrix multiplication commutes with the addition.13:04So, I can instead write this as the matrix, the cost matrix that we had in the earlier13:09slide, times X1, X2, X3, and I can pull the alpha out because of constants remember come13:15out plus the same matrix times Y1, Y2, Y3.13:23And then, of course, this I know is alpha times C of X1, X2, X3. I mean it is the same13:27as the expression on top. It is equal to this expression. This this part is here and the13:33second part is corresponding to C of Y1, Y2, Y3. So, this is what we mean by a linearity.13:42So now, we can talk in general, what is a linear mapping? So, a linear mapping f from13:48Rn to Rm. And now, we are not doing R3 or R we will just do it for any arbitrary n and13:54m. mean something of this form where you have f of X1, X2, Xn is summation a1jxj summation14:02a2jxj summation amjxj, what are these aijs, they are real numbers.14:08So, basically a linear mapping can be thought of as a combination or a, sorry, a collection14:13of linear combinations. Except you arrange them in a vector, so it gives you a function.14:20So linear mapping is a function, which has this form. So just to be clear, if you take14:27something like f of x is x squared, that is not a linear mapping or f of x is logarithm14:33of x that is not a linear mapping or f of x is e to the power x that is not a linear14:37mapping. So, it should be linear, meaning it has this is very nice form.14:43So, we can of course write this as matrix multiplication, because notice that the right-hand14:50side, if we think of it, instead of a row vector, if we think of it as a column vector14:56then we can obtain it as multiplying A times x. What is A? A is exactly the matrix given15:04by putting these coefficients into the appropriate places. So, the matrix the ijth entry of A15:11is aij where aijs is the corresponding coefficient above.15:16So finally, let us talk about linearity of linear mappings. This is exactly what we did15:24for the cost vector. So, it follows that a linear mapping satisfies linearity, which15:30means f of X1 plus Cy1 comma X2 plus Cy2, comma Xn plus Cyn is equal to f of X1, X2,15:39Xn plus C times f of Y1, Y2, Yn.15:41Why is that? So, the reason is because I can write f of X1 plus Cy1 comma X2 plus Cy2,15:58Xn plus Cyn as A times X1 plus Cy1, X2 plus Cy2, Xn plus Cyn. So, here of course, I am,16:10when I write it as A times just, I get a column letter, but you think of it as a row vector.16:16So, when I say equal, I mean, you take the row vector corresponding to this column vector.16:22So, the second I mean the column vector over there X1 plus Cy1 I can break up into two16:32separate vectors along with a constant. And then because matrix multiplication is commutes16:42with or distributes over addition, we get this, which is exactly f of X1, X2, Xn plus16:59C times f of Y1, Y2, Yn. You could do this directly also, by the way, and I will encourage17:04you to check this from the expression for the linear combinations.17:11So, just to recall what everything that we have done in this video. We saw the examples17:24of grocery shops, first of a single grocery shop and the corresponding cost vector, and17:29then of a bunch of grocery shops. And we saw that it was useful to arrange this as a function.17:37We can treat the cost as a function, it is a linear combination, and that is the expression17:43for the function, and it satisfies what is called linearity.17:47And then if we have several costs, which is what we had four different jobs, we arrange17:53them into a cost function of which is a function of three variables. Taking values, depending18:01on how many shops there are. So, it could be in, so we had three shops, so it took values18:05in R3 so it is a function from R3 to R3, but, each coordinate of the expression that we18:15had was a linear combination of the X1, X2, Xn of X1, X2, X3. So, such a thing is exactly18:23what is called a linear mapping. And then we observed that linear mappings are satisfied18:28linearity. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.