---
title: "L5.5: What is a linear transformation :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L5.5: What is a linear transformation :: IITM Online Degree

L5.5: What is a linear transformation

Transcript Language

English

00:14Transcriber's Name: Crescendo Transcriptions Pvt Ltd00:15Mathematics of Data Science 2 Professor Sarang Sane00:16Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras00:17What is a linear transformation00:18Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online degree on Data Science. In this00:22video, we are going to study what is a linear transformation.00:24So, let us just recall before we go ahead, what is a linear mapping, this is what we00:30studied in the previous video. A linear mapping f from Rn to Rm, so it is a function, and00:38the function has a very particular form. Namely, the form is that every coordinate is given00:47by a linear combination. This is the form of the function, and linear combination with00:53what coefficients, the coefficients are real numbers.00:55So, we studied this to some extent in the previous video, and we saw the use of such01:05a thing. For example, we looked at the examples of the grocery shops. And we noticed that01:15linear mappings have some very interesting properties called linearity. So further, we01:22can write this in the form of matrix multiplication, A times x, where the ijth entry of the matrix01:32A is little aij and X is the column with X1, X2, Xn, and linear mapping satisfy linearity,01:43which means if you have f of X1 plus Cy1, f of X2 plus Cy2 and so on and Xn plus Cyn01:49that is f of X1, X2, Xn plus C times f of Y1, Y2, Yn.01:56So, let us define what is a linear transformation. So, a linear transformation is basically whatever02:01we want the same properties that we had in the previous slide, but for arbitrary vector02:09spaces, instead of for Rn and RM we look at vector spaces V and W. So, we say, a function02:16f from V to W is a linear transformation, if for any two vectors, v1 and v2 in the vector02:25space V, and for any c in R so that is a scalar the following conditions hold, f of V1 plus02:33V2 is f of V1 plus f of V2, and f of C times V1 one is equal to C times f of V1.02:42So before going ahead, maybe, I will point out that this is the same as linearity. So,02:46this is equivalent to linearity as in the previous slide, which we said that f of V103:01plus C times V2 is f of V1 plus C times f of V2. Why is that? Suppose we assume it has03:11linearity, then, of course, both of these are clear, because we can put C equals 1 and03:18that will give us the first condition.03:20So, by putting c equals one, we get this. By taking V1 to be zero and calling V2 as03:27V1, we get the second 1. So, if we know linearity is true, then we get both these that both03:34these conditions hold. Conversely, if we know both of the conditions hold, then if we have03:39V1 plus CV2, so I do not know linearity a priory, but I know that these two conditions03:43hold.03:44So, I can treat CV2 as a vector, and use the first condition to write this as a f of V103:51plus f of C times V2. We use the first equation with CV2 in place of this V2 and V1 in place04:01of the V1. And then we use the second equation, the second condition for writing the second04:14term here, f of CV2 as C times f of V2, and that is what we want for linearity. So, this04:22is equivalent to linearity. So, you could either express it this way or you could express04:27it in terms of the way we have written it, which is we have written it earlier that is,04:31which is f of V1 plus CV2 is f of V1 plus C times f of V2.04:36Let us look at some examples. So, here are some examples. So, these are all going to04:43be examples of linear mapping. So, in particular, they are linear transformations. So, I should04:50have pointed out before that linear mappings are linear transformations because linear04:56mapping satisfy linearity.04:58So maybe I should write here. So, linear mappings are linear transformations as we have defined05:09above. So, linear mappings mean when we have V and W, as some Rn and Rm respectively and05:18then the function f is given by a bunch of a collection of linear combinations. We have05:26seen already that in that case that satisfy linearity, and we have checked linearity is05:30the same as these two conditions.05:31So, all these examples are going to be examples of linear mapping. So, in particular, they05:35are linear transformations. So, f of x, y is 2x comma y, f of x, y is 2x comma 0, f05:42of x, y, z which is from R3 to R3 is x by 2, 3 y comma 5z. R3 to R4 this time, so f05:53of x, y, z is 4y minus z, 3y plus 11 by 19z, 5x minus 2z, 23y, and then maybe R to R3,06:06three which is f of t is t comma 3, t comma 23 by 89 t.06:13And maybe a last function which is also linear transformation, which is a projection function06:21f of x, y is x, so it projects onto the x, x. We will see this later in some other context06:26a few weeks from now.06:27So, all these are linear mapping so in particular they are linear transformations. Of course,06:34we will also see some non-trivial examples of linear transformations. By non-trivial06:38I mean, where the V or W are not R2 or R3. I mean not Rm or Rn.06:45So, let us recall before going ahead what is a one-one function and what is an onto06:49function. Possibly you have seen this already Maths 1, if not, just look at this definition.06:57So, function f from V to W. Now V and W, are need not be vector spaces here these could07:04be any sets. So, it is called one-one or injective. If f of V1 is f of V2 implies V1 as V2.07:12Similarly, such a function is called onto or surjective if for any little w in capital07:20W. We have a little v and capital V, such that f of little v is little w. So, for a07:30linear transformation being one-one is equivalent to f of V0 implies V0. Why is that? So, let07:38us prove that.07:39So, let us assume that f is one-one. Notice f is a linear transformation. I am assuming07:48it is a linear transformation. Otherwise, of course, this is none of this even makes07:52sense because we do not even know what is the 0. So, f is one-one. So, f is a linear08:00transformation and f is one-one, assume f is one-one. So then, we know f of V1 is f08:22of V2. This is given to us.08:37But on the other hand, we know that f is a linear transformation. So, one of the properties08:44of a linear transformation is that f of 0 is 0. So, f of 0 is 0. So here what do we08:57mean by 0 and 0 here, this, the 0 inside the bracket is the 0 in V it is a vector space,09:03remember, so it has a 0 and 0 outside f of 0, the value is 0 in W. So, this is true because09:10it is a linear transformation.09:13Maybe, I should point out why for a linear transformation f of 0 is 0 that is because09:23if you take f of 0 plus 0, then we get f of 0 plus f of 0, so this implies f of 0 is equal09:36to f of 0 plus f of 0. So, we can, so this is happening inside a vector space W, so we09:46can subtract f of 0 from both sides.09:48So, what that will give us is that f of 0 is 0. So, we know that, so this is true for09:56any linear transformation, f of 0 is 0. So now we want to check that f of V0 implies10:01a V0. So, if f of V is 0 that means f of V is the same as f of 0. And now I can use the10:14fact that f is one-one to conclude that V is 0. So, this shows that if f is one-one,10:21then this condition is satisfied that f of V0 implies V0.10:24So, one way we have shown one way that if it is one-one it satisfies this condition.10:33Conversely, so that means we assume that assume f of V0 implies V0. So now I want to prove10:45it is one-one. So, let us assume that f of V1 is f of V2, but then that will mean that10:50f of V1 minus V2 is equal to 0.10:54So, again, here I have to explain why. So that is because I can subtract f of V2 on11:02both sides so I will get f of V1 minus f of V2 is equal to 0. But now, I can take this11:12minus inside. So, what I am claiming is that this is f of V1 plus f of minus V2. This is11:230.11:24And then I am using a linearity because it is a linear transformation to say that V1,11:30f of V1 minus V2. So, the key step is to is prove that I can take minus inside. Why can11:36I take minus inside? Let me do that here. So, the reason is, the same argument that11:44we had before. So, if we have V plus minus V, then this is f of 0 is 0, because we just11:53proved f of 0 is 0.11:56So now you expand the first term, the first expression here, this expression, so you write12:02this as f of V, plus f of minus V, and then you take the f of V on the other side, so12:09that will tell you that f of minus V is minus f of V, that is what we wanted to prove. So,12:17I have proved indeed, that f of V1 is f of V2, you subtract f of V2 on both sides and12:25then that will give you f of V1 minus V2. So, you get f of V1 minus V2 is 0. But now12:31I know this condition that f of V0 implies V0, that means V1 minus V2 is 0. That means12:39V1 is equal V2, adding V2 both sides. So, we have proved that they are equivalent.12:45So, in general, if you have a arbitrary function on sets, checking one-one means you have to12:51check this condition that f of V1 is f of V2 implies V1 is V2. But if you have a linear12:57transformation, you can instead just check that f of V0 implies V0. So, it reduces to13:05checking those for those values of V, which so that when you apply f to those values,13:12they become 0. So, this is a special set and we are going to study that set later. In fact,13:20it is a subspace.13:21So now let us get to what is an isomorphism, which is why we studied this notion of one-one13:25and onto. So, recall first that a function f, again, for any arbitrary sets, V and W,13:32if you have a function f from V to W it is called a bijection or we say that it is bijective.13:39If it is one-one and onto. So, or sometimes it is called a one-one correspondence. So,13:49it is one-one and onto. What that means is, what that means is, if you have V here, then13:54there is a unique W that corresponds to it, which is what we are calling f of V.13:57So, there is exactly one such V, such that f of V is equal to W. For each W such a V14:04exists, and it is unique, that is what is called a bijection or that is the essence14:09of a bijection. So in other words, you can pair up elements, you have V here, W here,14:14V here, W here, that those pairs are exactly, the W paired with V is what we are calling14:20f of V.14:21So that is, if you can do such a thing that is called a bijection. Fine, so what is an14:28isomorphism? So, this is what I just said, bijection is equivalent to saying that for14:35any W in W there exists a unique V such that f of V is W. So, a linear transformation between14:41two vector spaces V and W is an isomorphism if it is a bijection. So, it is an isomorphism14:50if it is a bijection. So, it is a linear transformation along with a bijection. So it satisfies that14:59f of, it satisfies linearity, which means f of V1 plus Cv2 is f of V1 plus C times f15:04of V2 and it satisfies that it is one-one and onto.15:07Namely, that for every W and W, there is a unique little v in capital V, such that f15:13of V is little w. So, example one seen earlier is an isomorphism, let us work that out. So,15:21what was the example, it was f from R2 to R2 where f of x, y is 2x comma y, we already15:27know this is a linear transformation because it is a linear mapping.15:30So, to see that it is a bijection so f of x, y, so because it is a linear transformation15:39to check injectivity it is enough to check that whenever this becomes 0 and remember15:43that 0 in R2 is the point on the vector 0, 0. That means, 2x comma y is 0, 0. How do15:53I get this? By evaluating f on x comma y so we know that is 2x comma y.15:59But when will this be 0 comma 0? This will be 0 comma 0 precisely when our 2x is 0, and16:08y is 0. So already, we have got that y is 0, but 2x is 0 means that x is 0 where all16:14the real numbers. So, I can see that, which means x comma y is 0, 0. So this is saying16:23f of x comma y is 0, 0 implies x comma y is 0, 0 that is the 0 in the vector space R2.16:28So, we have checked it's injective, so therefore, or one-one. So therefore, so this argument16:35is saying that it is f is one-one.16:38Let us check that it is surjective or onto. To check that it is onto we have to show that16:47if you are given any element let us say U comma V in R2, you can get x, y such that16:54f of x, y is U comma V. So, if so, for U comma V in R2 consider x to the U by 2 and y to17:09be V. Where did I get this?17:11This is not coming from magic, I want 2x to be equal to U and y to be V, so X must be17:17U by 2, and that clearly suggest that so therefore, f of x, y is 2x comma y is 2 times U by 217:31comma V, which is U comma V. So, this is now saying it is onto. Great. So, we have seen17:42how to prove that this is an isomorphism.17:46So, we should also look at examples of things which are not iso, linear transformations17:52which are not isomorphisms. So, here is an example, which is not an isomorphism. The17:59second example that we saw. So, this is f of x, y is 2x comma 0. So, what goes wrong?18:05Well, several things go wrong. First of all, there is no pre-image for the vector U comma18:10V where V is non-zero.18:13For example, 01 has no pre-image. Why does not it have a pre-image because you can see18:18that the only vectors that are images are of the form something comma 0, so 0 comma18:251 cannot be a pre-image, sorry, cannot have a pre-image. So that means there is no V in18:34R2 or no x, y in R2 such that f of x, y is equal to 0, 1 that is what we are saying.18:39So, this is not onto or surjective.18:43So similarly, if you take f of x, y to be 0, 0 then that means to 2x is 0, 2x comma18:530 is 0 comma 0, which means x is 0, but y could be anything. So, for example, if you19:00take f of 0 comma 1, then the answer you get is 0. That means, we cannot say that f of19:08x, y is 0, 0 implies x, y is 0, 0 because you could have many other choices.19:13For example, you could have 0 comma 1. So, this is not one-one. So, both of the conditions19:19needed for a bijection fail. So, this is a, this is not an isomorphism by a margin. There19:25can be examples where you have one-one but not onto or onto but not one-one. Here is19:31an example which is not onto. So, f of t is t comma 3, t comma 23 by 89 t, this is one-one19:38but not onto, I will suggest you check why it is one-one but not onto.19:44And similarly, if you take the projection map R2 to R, then this is onto but not one-one.19:52Again I will suggest you check why it is onto but not one-one. It is clearly onto I think,19:57but 1, 1 again I think it is clearly not one-one. So, I hope, this gives you a feeling for what20:05we mean by an isomorphism.20:09So, let V be a vector space with basis V1, V2, Vn. So, now, let us introduce basis into20:18the picture. So, the what we are going to say here is that if you have a basis then20:23the linear transformation is determined by the values it takes on the basis. So, suppose20:28V1, V2, Vn is a basis and f is a linear transformation, then the ordered vectors f of V1, f of V2,20:37f of Vn uniquely determined f.20:39Why do I say this? So, the reason one says this is the following. If I want to get f20:47of V, I want to know what is f of V for some V in V. So, let v be indeed V, and I want20:54to know what is f of V. So, I am claiming that it is determined by f of V1, f of V2,21:01f of Vn. So, we know that if V1, V2, Vn is a basis, there is a unique linear combination21:07corresponding to each which equals any given vector in that vector space. So V is summation21:13ci vi for a unique set of scalarsC1, C2 Cn.21:16So, then what is f of V? f of V is a f of summation civi, but now, I know that f is21:27a linear transformation. So, in particular I mean that means it satisfies linearity.21:32So, by linearity, I can pull out the summation and the scalars and write this as summation21:39ci times f of Vi. I do this sequentially. So, in my definition of linearity, I had f21:47of V1 plus C times V2 is f of V1 plus C times f of V2. So, I keep applying it to. First21:53I applied to Vn and then I applied to Vn minus 1 and so on. And I can so, I can pull out22:00any sum. It need not be only vectors it could be any finite sum. And similarly, I can pull22:07out scalars that is what the second condition of linearity told us.22:15So, since that is the case, this is determined, this f of V is determined by the values of22:28f of V1, V2, Vn. My values I mean the vectors, these are vectors, not numbers. So, if you22:47take a vector V, and I want to evaluate f of V, all I need to know are what are the22:51scalars Ci and what are the vectors f of V1, f of V2, f of Vn, that determines f of V,23:00and that is what we mean by saying that a basis determines an ordered basis mind determines23:09the linear transformation.23:11I mean, we could flip this around, and say that suppose I have a, suppose I specify what23:20are I mean, some n many vectors f of V1, f of V2, f of Vn. So, suppose W1, Wn is a specified23:37set of vectors in W then there is a unique linear transformation if such that f of Vi24:06is equal to Wi. How do I define this linear transformation? That is exactly what this24:12equation here is telling.24:16So, what I do is I define f to be so define f of V is summation ciwi where V is equal24:32to summation civi. And then let us see what is f of Vi. So, f of Vi, so to get any f of24:45Vi, you have to first see how is Vi expressed in terms, how is that vector expressed in24:50terms of the basis, but in terms of the basis Vi itself is a basis vector.24:56So, maybe let us say Vj, or let us say Vk. So, you put CK to be one, and all the other25:11cais to be zero, and that is the only way in which you can write, Vk as a linear combination25:16of these basis vectors, because it is a basis.25:20So, if you do that, then all the terms on the in this expression, submission, ciwi will25:26vanish except the kth one. And for the kth one, what you will get is CK is 1, so you25:30will get one times WK, which is exactly WK.25:34So, f of VK is WK, that is what we wanted. So now this linear, so this linear transformation25:44satisfies indeed that f of vi is equal to wi. And it is unique because every linear25:50transformation is determined by what values the basis vectors take. And since they take25:56I mean, these values are specified, no other linear transformation can force that f of26:06vi is equal to wi, that is exactly what we proved before. So with this, let us go ahead.26:14This is a slightly tricky point and I mean, I want a bit you to think a little about this26:20as we go ahead.26:22Let us do this on a particular example. Suppose I take the standard basis 1, 0, 0, 1 of R2,26:31what linear transfer. I should have pointed and said that second part that we did, where26:35we specified W1, W2, Wn and then we defined the linear transformation f that is called26:43extending the function f. So, we have f of vi is equal to wi and then we are extending26:51it to the entire vector space W sorry entire vector space V.26:56So here, in this example, we have, so W1, W2 are these two vectors 2, 0 and 0,1 and27:06let me write that so this is your W1 and this is W2. So we want to extend this function27:17f to a linear transformation from R2 to R2.27:21So, to do that, we have to write any x comma y first as a linear combination of 1,0 zero27:27and 0,1 X times 1,0 plus y times 01. And then I define f of x, y as x times f of 1, 0 which27:42is 2,0 plus y times f of 0 comma 1, which is 0 comma 1. So, this is 2x, comma y. So27:52here, maybe I should put in a step there is 2x, comma 0 plus 0 comma y just 2x, comma27:57y. This was exactly the first example that we looked at, in this video of linear transformations28:03or linear mappings. So, this is the function that we get by or the linear transformation28:09we get by extending the function, which takes 1, 0 to 2, 0 and 0, 1 to 0, 1 that is the28:18way we say this.28:21So, let us change the basis and see what we get if we change the basis. So, the point28:28here is if you change the basis, you will get a different linear transformations, and28:31this is very important. So, in the previous example, instead of working with the standard28:36basis let us work with the basis 1, 0 and 1, 1. So let us say I take 1, 0 to 2, 0 and28:431, 1 to 1, 1.28:48So, if that if you do that, then what do we get? So, every element x, y is uniquely represented29:01in terms of this basis as x minus y times 1, 0 plus y times 1, 1. So, I think here,29:11there is a typo, this is f of 1, 1 should have been 0, 1 and not 1, 0.29:17We could, I mean, we can also do 1, 1 but it was intended to be 0, 1. So basically the29:25basis was changed, but the values were the same, so the W1, W2, Wn. So here we have W129:33and W2, they are the same, but the basis V2, V2, Vn was changed. And the question is what29:38linear transformation do you get by extending? So let us apply the same thing.29:45So, if you have f of x, y, you write this as x minus y times f of 1,0 which is 2 comma29:520, plus y times f of 1 comma 1. So, this is x minus y times 2 comma 0. So, note that W130:03and W2 are the same. So, this part will, meaning these two things will remain the same. But30:10what changes?30:11What changes is are the coefficients this changes. So, y has remained the same, but30:18x has changed. So this is going to give us something else, this is going to give us two30:24times x minus y comma 0 plus 0 comma y. So, this is 2x minus 2y comma y. that is the linear30:37transformation.30:38If instead we had chosen, I mean, just as an example, since I had that typo over there,30:44let me work that out as well. If instead, my basis was the one that I have here, 1,30:580 and 1,1 and W1 was 2,0 and W2 was 1,1, then what would have x, y, have been? So f of x,31:08y would have been x minus y times 2 comma 0 plus y times 1 comma 1, if you work out31:21is 2x minus 2y plus y comma y, which is 2x minus y, comma y. So this is a second example.31:35So, let us just summarize what we have done this video. So, in this video, we have seen31:43what is the linear transformation. Essentially, it is just generalizing the definition of31:49a linear mapping, which was a bunch of linear combinations to arbitrary vector spaces. Of31:57course, in arbitrary vector spaces, we do not have the, I mean linear combinations,32:05we have to make sense of what that means.32:08So, instead of doing it that way, we specified by the other property, which is to say that32:15they are satisfying the two conditions of linearity or equivalently a single condition32:22that we call linearity in the previous video. So, either f of V1 plus V2 with f of V1 plus32:28f of V2 and f of C times V1 is C times f of V1 or equivalently, f of V1 plus C times V232:37is f of V1 plus c times f of V2.32:40This is exactly the same, as saying that f of summation civi is equal to summation ci32:45times f of vi. This is linearity. So that is what was a linear combination, we saw,32:49of course, just by its very nature, that linear mappings are linear transformations. And we32:54saw a bunch of examples.32:57And we saw that they can be written in some kind of matrix form. And finally, we saw the33:02relevance of a basis to all this. Namely, that you can use the basis to express a linear33:09transformation in terms of the values that are taken by the basis vectors, and that actually33:17determines the linear transformation entirely.33:22And finally, we saw that if you, you have to be careful about what basis you choose.33:28And so, if you choose different basis the linear transformations you are going to get33:33by extending the basis may be different, so that you have to be careful about. So, thank33:40you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.