---
title: "L8.1: Orthgonality and linear independence :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L8.1: Orthgonality and linear independence :: IITM Online Degree

L8.1: Orthgonality and linear independence

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component  of the online B.Sc. program in data science.  00:21In this video, we are going to talk about  orthogonality and linear independence.  00:25So, we have seen before the  notion of an inner product  00:29and in this video, we are going to continue  using the ideas of inner products and norms.  00:35So, let us recall first that we have expressed the  angle between two vectors in terms of the special  00:44inner product, namely the dot product in Rn, and  the special norm, namely the length in Rn. So,  00:51how do we do that? We take the angle  theta between two vectors, let us say,  00:56the vectors u and v. And of course,  when we talk about angle, we first,  01:02we have to first look at the plane that they span  and then we look at the angle on that plane.  01:07And how do we compute it? To compute it, we can  use the dot product or the norm and the norm,  01:14namely, cosine of theta is equal to u dot  v divided by norm of u times norm of v.  01:21So, the dot product is a special case  of an inner product on Rn and the length  01:27is a special case of a norm on Rn. So, let us first ask what is the geometric  01:35intuition of what are called orthogonal vectors.  We want to study orthogonality in this video.  01:39So, what is a pair of orthogonal vectors? So, the  angle theta between two vectors u and v in Rn,  01:48if it is a right angle, which means it is  90 degrees, then cosine of theta is 0.  01:55And we can, we have just seen in the previous  slide that we can compute it by looking at  02:00the dot product of these two vectors divided  by the product of the norms. So, that means,  02:060 is u dot v divided by norm of u times norm of  v. Of course, if we have a, if we have a ratio,  02:14which is 0, then the, that means the numerator  is 0. So, this means u dot v is 0.  02:20So, this is exactly what we mean by  saying two vectors are orthogonal.  02:27So, two vectors are orthogonal when in  Rn when they form a right angle, they  02:34are at right angles to each other. So, in R2, for  example, this is what we mean by two vectors are  02:43orthogonal. So, this is a geometric intuition. Let us, as an example, let us look at the vectors  02:481, 2, 3 and 2, 2, minus 2. They are orthogonal,  because if you compute the dot product,  02:59then you will see this is 1 times 2 plus 2 times  2 plus 3 times minus 2, which is 2 plus 4 minus 6,  03:08which is 0. So, that means cosine of theta is  0. And cosine of theta is 0 means you can back  03:17calculate to say that theta is 90 degrees. So, let us define the notion of an orthogonal  03:28vectors in the general vector space v.  And the intuition we have just seen is  03:32that if the dot product is 0, then in Rn the  vectors are said to be orthogonal. So, we can  03:39make a more general definition now. So, suppose  you have an inner product space v and you have  03:45two vectors u and v then we say that they are  orthogonal if you compute the inner product u,v  03:50and that is 0. So, the, let us do an example. Suppose you take R2 with the inner product  03:59given by this complicated looking function,  which we have seen in the previous video. So,  04:06you have the inner product of u,v is x1y1 minus  x1y2 minus x2y1 plus 2 times x2y2, and u is x1x2,  04:16v is y1y2. So, then the vectors 1, 1 and 1,  0 are orthogonal in this inner product.  04:23Let us compute why that is the case. So, if you  compute it for this inner product, what we get,  04:31so we get 1 times 1 minus x1 times y2, 1 times  0 plus x2 times y1, 1 times 1 plus 2 times x2  04:46times y2, which is 1 times 0. And you can see  this is 1 minus 0 minus 1 plus 0, so this is 0.  04:56So, the inner product is 0 and that is why  these vectors are orthogonal by definition.  05:01I want to point out that in this case  we chose this particular inner product  05:05on R2. Had we chosen the usual inner product  namely the dot product, then these vectors are  05:11not orthogonal. So, the notion of orthogonality  depends on the chosen inner product, even for Rn,  05:18it depends on which product to choose. Now, if we say without alluding to any inner  05:23product that the vectors are orthogonal then by  convention it means that we are talking about the  05:31usual inner product namely the dot product.  But if we specify some other inner product  05:36and talk about orthogonality, it means  with respect to that inner product.  05:41So, let us talk about an orthogonal set of  vectors. So, an orthogonal set of vectors in  05:47an inner product space V is a set of vectors whose  elements are mutually orthogonal, that means they  05:54are pair-wise orthogonal. So, if you take any two  of them, then they are orthogonal. So, explicitly  05:59what that means is if you take the set v1, v2, vk  in V then S is an orthogonal set of vectors.  06:05If you look at vi,vj that is 0, of course,  you need that i is not equal to J. So,  06:10if you take v1 and v2 are orthogonal  v1 and v3 are orthogonal, v1 and v4 are  06:11orthogonal, all the way up to v1 and  vk, similarly v2 and v3, v2 and v4,  06:14all the way up to vk and so on, that is  what we mean by mutually orthogonal.  06:23For example, let us consider R3 with the usual  inner product, the dot product, then the set S,  06:30which is 4, 3, minus 2, minus 3, 2, minus 3  and minus 5, 18, 17 is an orthogonal set of  06:36vectors. Let us quickly see why that is the  case. So, let us compute these dot products.  06:42So, if you dot this with minus 3, 2,  minus 3, then you get 4 times minus 3 plus  06:513 times 2 plus minus 2 times minus 3 which  is minus 12 plus 6 plus 6 which is 0.  07:04So, certainly the first two are orthogonal. Let us  look at the next, maybe the first and the third.  07:17So, if you do this, you get minus 20 plus  07:2454 minus 34 and indeed that 0. And finally,  if you do the second and the third one,  07:42then we get minus 15 plus 36 minus  51 and oh, I made a mistake here,  07:54sorry, this is plus 15, plus 15 plus 36  minus 51 which is 0. So, these are indeed  08:02mutually orthogonal. So, this is  an orthogonal set of vectors.  08:08So, this is, now let us talk about orthogonality  and linear independence. This is the title of our  08:12video and clearly this is the most important slide  in this video. So, the reason we want to discuss  08:19orthogonality, is one of the reasons at least, is  because we want to, because it has some relation  08:25with when vectors are linearly independent.  So, let us see what we want to say.  08:33So, suppose we have a orthogonal set of  vectors in the inner product space V, then  08:40v1, v2, vk is a linearly independent set of  vectors. So, if you have an orthogonal set,  08:46automatically it is a linearly independent  set. Now, let us recall, to check something  08:50is linearly independent was a fairly hard  process. We had to write down summation civi  08:57is 0 and then by some way we had to say  that each of the coefficients Ci is 0.  09:03And in Rn if we had to do this, that means  we had to solve a system of linear equations  09:10and check that indeed each coefficient is ending  up being 0. So, that was a fairly non-trivial  09:17process. Instead, here what we are saying is,  if it so happens that these v1, v2, vk are  09:24an orthogonal set of vectors and notice that  to check something is orthogonal is quite easy.  09:29You have to just check that the inner products  are 0, which is a fairly mechanical process.  09:35Let us see a quick proof or at least  idea of the proof of this statement  09:39why is this happening. So, suppose, maybe I will  do this in red. So, suppose summation civi is 0,  09:55well, then what I can do is I can take  the inner product of summation civi  10:06with vi or maybe let us say with v1, let us do it  10:11for v1, and you will see the  same thing happens for any vi.  10:15So, if you do that, then this is the inner  product of 0 with v1 and the inner product of 0  10:22with anything is 0. This is one of the things that  we know about inner products. You can check this  10:29from the definition, because you can write 0,v1,  0,v1 plus 0,v1 and then cancel 0,v1 on both sides.  10:42So, this is 0. But on the other end we know what this is,  10:47the first term is. So, this is a  sum. So, I can take out my summation.  10:54So, therefore, summation i is equal  to 1 through k, ci times vi,v1 is 0.  11:07Therefore, summation i is 1 through k, I can take  out the constant also, vi,v1 is 0 and therefore,  11:23ci. So, what are the non-zero terms here? Remember, that these are an orthogonal set of  11:30vectors. So, unless i is equal to 1, everything  is 0, because vi,v1 is equal to inner product of  11:37v1,vi. So, inner product of vi and v1 is 0 for  all i not equal to 1. So, the only term that I  11:44am left with here is c1 times v1,v1 and this is 0.  And so, if v1 is not 0, then this inner product is  11:55non-zero, so and that will imply that c1 is 0. So, maybe here I should make a  12:05small correction to what I have written  here. Namely, I should say, let v1, v2,  12:10vk be an orthogonal set of non-zero vectors.  So, typically, when we say orthogonal set,  12:18we often mean non-zero vectors. But that is  not, that is not the definition per set. So,  12:25we will say orthogonal set of non-zero vectors. So, if you have an orthogonal set of non-zero  12:30vectors, then this part v1, v1 is not  0 and as a result c1 is equal to 0.  12:38And you can do this argument for instead  of v1 you could have done it with v2  12:43or v3 or vj in general and you get that cj is  0. So, that will tell you that each of these  12:49constants is 0, which is exactly the definition  of linear independence. So, that is the reason  12:55why every orthogonal set of non-zero vectors is  indeed a linearly independent set of vectors.  13:06So, what is an orthogonal basis? So, let V  be an inner product space. A basis consisting  13:11of mutually orthogonal vectors is called an  orthogonal basis. So, this is the same as saying  13:18that an orthogonal basis is an  13:22orthogonal set which is also a basis or a  basis which is also an orthogonal set.  13:27So, since an orthogonal set we saw is linearly  independent, an orthogonal set is a basis exactly  13:34when it is a maximal orthogonal set. Because how  do we, when is a linearly independent set a basis?  13:42When it is the maximal linearly independent set.  So, if it is already orthogonal, then that is  13:46the same as saying it is a maximal orthogonal  set or maximal linearly independent set.  13:52So, what does maximal orthogonal set mean?  It means there is no orthogonal set which  13:58contains strictly contains this set that  is being referred to. So, a set is called  14:05a maximal orthogonal set if there is no  super set which is also an orthogonal set.  14:12So, specifically, what this means is if the  dimension of V is n, then an orthogonal basis  14:17is exactly an orthogonal set of n vectors.  So, this is what you should keep in mind.  14:23So, let us look at some examples of orthogonal  basis. The standard basis that we have seen is  14:28an orthogonal basis. Of course, I have  not referred to an inner product here.  14:33So, as I mentioned before, the convention  means that is that if I do not refer to  14:39any particular inner product, you have to take  the dot product. So, the standard basis in the  14:45inner product space Rn with the dot product. Let us look at this example which we have done  14:51before. So, we have seen already  that this is a orthogonal set.  14:57What is the size of the set? It is a set of size  3. And what is the dimension of R3? It is 3. So,  15:03this is a orthogonal set with three vectors, where  3 is the dimension of the vector space R3. So,  15:13this is going to be an orthogonal basis. We are  using this thing here, the statement here.  15:21And finally, let us look at R2 with the inner  product that we, the non-standard inner product  15:28that we defined earlier, then we saw that this is  a orthogonal set of vectors, and it has size 2.  15:36So, there are two vectors and the dimension of R2  is 2. So, this must be an orthogonal basis. So,  15:42this is also an orthogonal. Again, we are  using this fact that is written here.  15:51So, let us recall what we saw in this video.  So, we have seen the notion of an orthogonal,  15:58when two vectors are orthogonal, so a pair  of orthogonal vectors or we can just say just  16:05orthogonal vectors, remember that this depends  on the inner product chosen and the intuition  16:11is coming from the fact that in R2 or in Rn,  if, with respect to the usual dot product, if  16:18vectors are orthogonal, then that exactly means  that they are at a right angle to each other,  16:23like this perpendicular to each other. So, in general, we can talk about the notion  16:30of orthogonal vectors for  any inner product space. And  16:35this is a very useful notion, because if  you have an orthogonal set, which means  16:40all the vectors are mutually orthogonal, then that  set is actually linearly independent. So, now,  16:48we can check linear independence using the notion  of orthogonality, this is the main point.  16:55And after that we defined the  notion of an orthogonal basis,  16:59namely its orthogonal set which is also a basis  and if you have your vector space as dimension V,  17:07essentially what this means is that you  have a set of n or n vectors which formed  17:12an orthogonal set and we have seen the  examples out here. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.