---
title: "L7.1: Equivalence and similarity of matrices :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L7.1: Equivalence and similarity of matrices :: IITM Online Degree

L7.1: Equivalence and similarity of matrices

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the match 2 component  of the online degree course on data science.  00:22In this video, we are going to talk about  equivalence and similarity of matrices.  00:27So, we want to impose certain equivalence  or what is called an equivalence relation  00:35based on two different relations, we are going  to study this on the set of matrices.  00:41So, the first one is called equivalence,  this is the set of m by n matrices.  00:46And then the second one is for square matrices.  So, the reason we want to do this is because there  00:52are certain what I will call invariants. This  may not make sense right now, but that is fine  00:58called Eigen values, that you  are going to see later on and  01:02these will come up not in this course, but  in the data science part that you will see  01:09in the subsequent semesters where you will  use these for certain calculations. So,  01:17without bothering about what everything that I  said before, whether or not it made sense, let us  01:21get into the integrities of what is equivalence  and similar similarity for matrices.  01:28So, let us consider two, we will first  talk about equivalence of matrices.  01:32Let us consider two matrices of order m  by n, both have the same order, remember.  01:39So, we say A is equivalent to B, if B is equal  to Q times A times B, so we can find matrices,  01:47Q and P, which are invertible. So, P has to  be because it is invertible, because I impose  01:55the condition of being invertible. First  of all, they have to be square matrices.  01:59And since we are seeing QAP that means A is  remember m by n, that means P has to be n by n,  02:05and Q has to be m by m, so they  have to be invertible matrices,  02:12and B has to be equal to Q times A times P. So, you have, if we can find Q and P or P and Q,  02:19such that B is equal to Q times A times P  meaning when you compute Q times A times P,  02:27you get B, then we say A and B are  equivalent, or A is equivalent to B.  02:34So, the other way of viewing this is by doing  our good old row and column operations.  02:43So, if you can perform a series of row operations  on A, and then a series of column operations on A,  02:52so that you can then obtain B, then we will  say that A is equal to B. So, you take all the  03:03column operations on the right,  03:07so you get P and you take all the row  operations on the left, and that is you get Q  03:14by multiplying successively that is. So, we have seen this idea before.  03:19And I am just trying to motivate how to get  Q and P, if you want to actually get it.  03:24But we will see a different way of getting  them. The other characterization is that the  03:29rank is the same. So, the reason this works  is because remember that if you allow both  03:35row and column operations then you can take any  matrix and reduce it to the form where you have  03:43block matrices, where you have the identity matrix  0,0,0. I will say that carefully in a second.  03:52So, equivalence of matrices is an equivalence  relation. So, what is an equivalence relation? So,  03:57I am not defining it, but what it  means is, A is equivalent to itself.  04:03Remember that we say A is  equal to B if there exists  04:07P and Q, so that B is equal to P time Q times  A times P. So, A is equivalent to itself is  04:13saying that there exists some Q and P, so  that A is equal to Q times A times P.  04:20Now, I think it is clear what Q and P should  be. We will write it down in a second.  04:24So, A is equivalent to B implies B is equivalent  to A. Again, because of invertibility of P and Q,  04:29this is clear and A is equal to B and B  to C implies A is equivalent to C. So,  04:35let us quickly write down how to do this. A is  equivalent to itself because you can write A as  04:42identity m cross m times A times identity n cross  n, of course, identity matrices are invertible.  04:49A is equivalent to B implies B is equivalent  A. Well, we know that A is equivalent to B  04:54that means B is equal to P times sorry, Q times  05:01A times P, and that implies by multiplying  by the inverses that A is equal to  05:09Q inverse times B times P  inverse. So, A is equivalent to B,  05:13that is what we started with that means B is QAP,  that will imply that B is equivalent to A.  05:19So, because we can write A as Q inverse  times B times P inverse. So, that means  05:25you can multiply on the left by some invertible  matrix and on the right by some invertible matrix  05:29to get A from B, so B is equivalent to A. And  then A is equal to B and B to C implies A is  05:38equivalent to C. This is because B is equal  to QAP, C is equal to let us say, Q prime,  05:48B, P prime, then you can replace B  by the first part. So, C is equal to  05:56Q prime times Q times A times P times P prime. And now Q and Q prime are invertible,  06:05that means this product is invertible.  Similarly, P and P prime are invertible,  06:09so this product is invertible. So, I have an  invertible matrix on the left and on the right,  06:14which I can multiply to A, in order to get  C so that is why A is equivalent to C. And  06:21now we can just say A and B are equivalent  because this is an equivalence relation.  06:25So, once you know that A is equivalent to B,  B is also equivalent to A, so we can just say  06:29A and B are equivalent. So, from now on, I may  sometimes say A and B are equivalent matrices,  06:35that means A is equivalent to B or B is equal  to A both are the same. Now, let me come back  06:41to this rank of A is rank of B. What I meant here was that  06:46you can get Q and P so that QAP is of this form.  06:57And you can also get Q prime and P prime so that  Q prime B, P prime is of this form. And then  07:08that is why A is equivalent to this matrix here  if we call it C, and B is equal to this matrix C,  07:14but this is an equivalence relation, that  means A is equivalent to B. So, that is one  07:19way of checking that if rank of A is rank of B,  then indeed, they are equivalent. Conversely, if  07:28they are equivalent then I will  leave it to you to check that indeed,  07:31the ranks are the same that is  a little bit of manipulation of  07:39column and row spaces. So, we know what it means  to say that two matrices are equivalent.  07:48So, let us look at the linear transformation f  from R3 to R2, given by f of x, y, z is x plus y,  07:54and y plus z. So, let us consider two ordered  bases for R3, the standard ordered basis, and  08:01another ordered bases which is 1, 1, 0,  0, 1, 1 and 0, 0, 1. And let us consider  08:07two ordered bases for R2, which is a standard  ordered bases and the bases, 1, 0 and 1,1.  08:15So, let us express the standard ordered bases  for R3 in terms of the standard ordered basis  08:22for R2 after applying f. So, if  you apply f to 1, 0, 0 you get  08:281 plus 0, comma 0 plus 0, so that gives  you 1, 0. If you apply f to 0, 1, 0 you get  08:380 plus 1 and 1 plus 0, which is 1, 1 and then you  write it in terms of the standard bases, which is  08:45one times 1, 0 plus one times 0, 1. And then if  you apply f to 0, 0, 1 you get 0 plus 0 and 0 plus  08:511, which is 0, 1 and that is just one times the  second vector in the ordered standard bases.  08:59So, if you want to write down the corresponding  matrix for this linear transformation, that is  09:05corresponding to the ordered bases, standard  ordered bases for R3 and standard, ordered  09:10basis for R2 you get 1,0, 1,1 and 0,1. So where  is this 1,0 coming from it is coming from here.  09:19Where is this 1,1 the second column coming from,  it is coming from these coefficients. And the  09:24third one is coming from these coefficients. This  is something we did in our previous videos.  09:31Let us do the same thing for the other two bases.  So, the other standard, the other ordered bases  09:37for R3 and the other ordered bases for R2. So, if  you look at f of 1,1,0 that is 1 plus 1 comma 1  09:45plus 0, that is 2,1, which you can express as one  times 1,0 plus one times 1,1. In these the ordered  09:53bases the second ordered bases gamma 2. Similarly, if you take f of 0,1,1 this is  09:590 plus 1 comma 1 plus 1, which is 1 comma 2.  And for this, if you order, if you write it in  10:06terms of the ordered basis it gives you minus  one times 1 comma 0 plus two times 1 comma 1.  10:14And for the last one, you have f of 0,0,1, which  is 0 plus 0 comma 0 plus 1, which is 0,1, which  10:21is minus 1 times 1,0, plus one times 1,1. So, if you look at the corresponding matrix,  10:29first column is going to come from the first  equation coefficients, the second column is  10:34going to come from the coefficients of the second  equation and the third column is going to come  10:39from the coefficients of the third equation. So,  it will look like 1,1 minus 1,2 and minus 1,1.  10:46So, what have we done so far, we have taken  a linear transformation and we have written  10:50down two matrices corresponding to two  different ordered sets of ordered bases.  10:59So, choose P to be this matrix 1, 0, 0 and 1,  1, 0, 0 ,1, 1 and Q to be 1 minus 1,0,1. So, I,  11:08this is something I produced out of the  air and here is what happens. So then,  11:14Q times A times P, this is something you have to  compute, I have done the computation here.  11:19This is 1 minus 1, 0, 1 times 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1.  So, this was A times 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1.  11:31So, if you multiply this out, let us see what you  get after doing the first multiplication, you get  11:40the first row in out of out of these two is, so  1 minus one times so this is 1, then this is 0,  11:57then this is minus 1, and then you have 0,1,1. And you want to multiply this to  12:05this matrix. So, if you do that, let us see  what we get. So, if you do 1, 0 minus 1,  12:12indeed, you get 1, then 1, 0 minus one times 0,  12:161, 1 that is minus 1, and similarly a minus 1.  So, this first row is indeed achieved and then  12:27for the second row, you take 0, 1, 1 and multiply  it over there so that gives you 1, 2 and 1, so  12:33indeed the second row is achieved. So, if you do  this multiplication yourself, you will be able to  12:37see that Q times A times P is indeed equal to B.  So, these matrices are equivalent to each other.  12:44So, this is not some a magic. So, consider a linear transformation T,  12:51V to W, and two ordered bases beta 1 and beta 2  for V, and two ordered bases gamma 1 and gamma  12:592 for W. So, like in the previous example, where  we had V was R3, W was R2 and beta 1 and gamma 1  13:08with a corresponding standard ordered bases beta 2  and gamma 2 are some other fixed ordered basis.  13:15So, we took A to be the matrix  corresponding to beta 1 and gamma 1.  13:20So, similarly, here, you take A to be the matrix  corresponding to T with respect to the basis  13:25beta 1 gamma 1 and you take B to be the matrix  corresponding to T with respect to the basis beta  13:312 and gamma 2, this is exactly what we did in  the previous example, then A is equal to B.  13:36So, the previous example is an example of this  phenomenon that is that we have mentioned here.  13:44So, the question is, how do I get Q and  how do I get P? So, for P, express the  13:57bases beta 2 in terms of beta 1, and for Q express  14:13the bases, I should say ordered bases,  everywhere we have ordered bases, the ordered  14:27bases gamma 1 in terms of gamma 2. So,  this is how I got those two matrices.  14:40Let us quickly look at that example again. So, right. So, let us look at this example again.  14:49So, if you look at the matrix P, the matrix P  is exactly expressing this basis here 1, 1, 0  15:01so this is one times E1 plus E2 plus 0 times  E3. So, 1, 1, 0 goes into your first column,  15:08and similarly each of these, so you have 0, 1,  1 which goes into your second column and 0, 0,  15:141 which goes into your third column,  and so that is how I get P.  15:18And for Q, what I did was, I wrote  1, 0 and 0, 1 in terms of 1, 1 and  15:29sorry, in terms of 1, 0 and 1, 1 so this  is one times 1, 0 plus 0 times 1, 1.  15:40That is why I get 1, 0 in  my first column and 0, 1 is  15:49minus one times 1, 0 plus one times  1, 1 that is how I get minus 1,1.  15:57So, this is a this is a strategy for  getting P and Q and this works for any  16:04general linear transformation and these fixed  ordered basis beta 1 beta 2 and gamma 1, gamma 2.  16:12So, yeah, so to complete this express this, get  P and Q from there and then you will find that  16:21B is equal to QAP. So, this is something you  have to check. I will leave it at that since  16:28this is not really a proof-based course. So, we have exhausted equivalence, let us  16:34look at similarity of matrices. So now, we are  going to restrict ourselves to square matrices.  16:39So, we will say that two square matrices of size  n by n are similar or rather we will say that A is  16:45similar to B. So, we have two n by n matrices  A and B and we will say A is similar to B,  16:50if there is an invertible matrix P, it  has to be of size n by n such that B is  16:56equal to P inverse AP. So, now the role of Q is  being played by P inverse. So, this is a very  17:02big change. So, if you can express B as P inverse  AP, then we will say that A is similar to B.  17:14So, again similarities and equivalence relation  by which we mean A is similar to itself. A similar  17:20to B implies be similar to A and A similar to B  and B to C implies A similar to C. Let us quickly  17:28see why this is the case. So, for the first  one, again, you can take P to be identity,  17:33then A is equal to identity inverse A identity.  Well, identity inversus identity, so this is just  17:40identity times A times identity, which is  certainly A. For the second one. Let us see  17:47how to do the second one, these are on the same  lines that we have done the previous part.  17:52So, A similar to B means B is equal to P inverse  AP, but that means, because P is invertible,  18:00I can multiply by P inverse on the right and P on  the left, so I get PBP inverse is equal to A. So,  18:09just rewriting that P is equal to P times,  so I want to write this as P inverse,  18:15inverse. So, why did I write it like that,  because I want to express this in terms of  18:20the inverse of whatever is occurring on the right  term, P inverse times B times P inverse.  18:26Now, you take your P inverse, call it something  else call it P prime, if you want, then we have  18:31an invertible matrix P prime such that A is  equal to P prime inverse times B times P prime,  18:37which is exactly saying that B is similar  to A. So, the second one is satisfied. And  18:44the third one again on the same lines as we  did our previous part. So, let us see.  18:52So, we have these B is P inverse  AP and C is let us say Q inverse  19:00AQ, these are both n by n invertible  matrices P and Q. So, then C is equal to  19:08my bad, this is not B, but this is this is not A  but this is B. So, C is equal to Q inverse and now  19:14you put in the values put in the first equation,  which is B is B inverse AP into the second,  19:22then you get Q inverse P inverse times A times  PQ, but remember Q inverse P inverse is exactly  19:30PQ inverse. And now if I call P times Q  by something else, let us say P prime,  19:37then this is saying that C is equal to  P prime inverse times A times P prime,  19:44which says that A is similar to C. So, this proves the three things. So,  19:51this says that similarity is what is called  an equivalence relation. So, now I can say,  19:56especially because of the second one, instead of  saying that A is similar to B I can just say A and  20:01B are similar because it does not matter which is  similar to which the other one always follows. So,  20:06A is similar to B, can be replaced by  saying A and B are similar matrices.  20:12So, why do we really care about similar matrices?  20:18So, the reason we care about similar matrices  is because of some of these properties. The  20:24first is that A and B are equivalent,  this is clear, because equivalent means  20:27that there is P and Q so that B is Q times  A times P, where P and Q are invertible,  20:33but if they are similar then you can take Q to be  P inverse, and P to be P. So, this is clear. A and  20:40B have the same rank as a result, the determinant  is the same. Now, this is a big difference.  20:46Remember, now we are in square matrices,  we could not have made any such  20:50kind of statement before. The determinant  of B is determinant of P inverse times AP,  20:58but determinants multiply, if you remember, then  that means this is determinant of P inverse times  21:04determinant of A times determinant of P. But now,  although, matrices do not commute real numbers do,  21:12and determinants give you real numbers. So, I can write this as  21:161 by determinant of P, because determinant  of P inverse is 1 by determinant of P  21:21times determinant of A times determinant of  P, and then because these are real numbers,  21:26I can shift 1 by determinant of P to the right,  and then determinant of P divided by determinant  21:31of P gives me 1, so I get just determinant  of A. So, they have the same determinants.  21:37This is a very useful property and this  is one of the properties that you will  21:41be using later on. Not in this course, but in  a different course for certain reasons.  21:49So, the reason, in fact, is that there are  other invariants, so one such as called the  21:54Eigen values which you are going to study later.  So, I have written some names here. And this,  22:03you are not expected to make sense of this, but  it is good, it will be good if you remember these,  22:09this just as a statement without understanding  when you do your next course.  22:14So, several other invariants of A and B are  the same such as the characteristic polynomial,  22:19the minimal polynomial and the Eigen  values with multiplicity. We are not  22:24going to define this right now, but this  is just as a feeder into the next course,  22:31where you will be using some of these things,  especially, this thing called the Eigen values.  22:37So, just remember this name. Does not matter if  you do not understand what it is now. So, this is  22:43why we are studying this idea of similarity. Let us do some examples or maybe one example.  22:50So, suppose you have a linear transformation f of  x, y, z is minus x plus y plus z, x minus y plus  22:55z and x plus y minus z. Now, we are going to use  the same standard the same bases. Earlier, we had  23:04two different bases. So, we had beta 1 and gamma  1, and then we had beta 2 and gamma 2. But here,  23:11remember that this linear transformation is  from R3 to R3 itself. So, we are going to use  23:16the same ordered bases. So, let us start with beta  being gamma being the standard ordered basis.  23:25So, let us do what we did before. Let  us express f of 1,0,0, f of 0,1,0,  23:30and f of ,0,0,1 in terms of the standard basis.  If you do that, you get f of 1,0,0 is minus 1,1,1,  23:37f of 0,1,0 is 1 minus 1,1 and  f of 0,0,1 is 1,1 minus 1.  23:46So that means these things exactly end up  being the coefficients, when you write it  23:52in terms of the standard ordered bases. And as a  result, the matrix of f corresponding to these,  24:00the standard ordered bases is coming from these  give you your first column these coefficients  24:07give you’re your second column and these  coefficients give you your third column.  24:13Let us choose some other bases, beta prime and  gamma prime is the same. So, this is the same,  24:20so this is beta prime, and it is also  gamma prime. So, let us express this f of  24:26each of these vectors in terms of as linear  combinations of these vectors themselves.  24:32So, if I do f of 1,1,1, I get back 1,1,1. Let us  remember what the linear transformation was it was  24:39minus x plus y plus z, x minus y  plus z and x plus y minus z.  24:46So, in that case we get f of 1,1,1 is minus 1 plus  1 plus 1, 1 minus 1 plus 1, 1 plus 1 minus 1 which  24:56is 1,1,1, so which is the first factor itself.  So, this is one times 1,1,1 plus 0 for the other 0  25:02is in the coefficients for the other vectors. f  of minus 1,1,0 is minus of minus 1, which is 1,  25:10plus 1, plus 0, which is 2, then minus  1 minus 1 plus 0, which is minus 2,  25:20and then 1 minus 1, rather minus 1 plus 1  plus 0, which is 0, so you get 2 minus 2, 0  25:28and f of minus 1,0 comma 1 is, again, you will,  if you do it you will get 2,0 minus 2.  25:34And now if you write these in terms of the  vectors that you have, the second 2 minus 2,0  25:42is just two times the second vector or  other minus two times the second vector.  25:47And the f of the third vector is minus  two times the third vector. So, what  25:53we have got is, there is a basis here, which is  beta prime, so that when I apply f on that basis  26:02for these particular vectors in  the bases, they just scale.  26:07So, f of 1,1,1 is 1,1,1, f of minus 1,1,0 is  minus 2 times minus 1,1,0 and 4 minus 1,0,1 is  26:16minus two times minus 1,0,1.  So, for these particular bases,  26:24the linear transformation behaves very nicely,  it just scales. One of the vectors remains the  26:29same so it scales by 1, the second and  third vector get scaled by minus 2.  26:38So, the corresponding matrix is diagonal  matrix 1, 0, 0, 0 minus 2, 0 and 0, .0 minus 2.  26:45And now, we know that diagonal matrices  are particularly easy to understand. So,  26:52what we see here is that, we have the same  linear transformation in terms of one basis  26:58the standard ordered bases, we got a matrix  which was not hard, but not maybe not so easy.  27:07But in terms of this bases,  this new basis beta prime  27:11ordered bases, we saw that  it is a diagonal matrix.  27:16(Refer Slide Time: 27:17) Now, let P be 1 minus 1 minus 1,1,1,0,1,0,1  27:23compute P inverse, this is something you can do,  I have done it here. It is one third, one third,  27:27one third, minus one third, two third minus one  third, minus one third, minus one third, two  27:32third. And now, if you multiply, so, you look at  P inverse AP, then you get. If you multiply this  27:41carefully, I have done it here. So, I will suggest  you check that this calculation is correct,  27:48you get the matrix B. So, this last matrix is  27:52exactly your diagonal matrix B. So, you  get that A and B are similar matrices.  27:58So, what have we seen, we have seen exactly  what happened in equivalence, the same kind  28:03of thing is happening for similarity, but  this time, instead of having different bases,  28:08your beta and gamma are the same ordered  bases because your vector space V and is  28:15the same vector space, it is V and V, so you  have a linear transformations from V to V.  28:19So, here we have R3 to R3. So, you take the bases,  beta and beta. In our case, we do identity, sorry,  28:28the standard ordered bases and you got  the matrix A, which is this matrix here.  28:35And in terms of a different ordered basis, which  we call beta prime, where implicitly gamma prime  28:41was equal to beta prime, we got this matrix. So,  remember that now the basis that you are choosing  28:48on both sides are the same. So, the beta and gamma  have to match. And then if you write down these  28:53matrices, they end up being similar matrices. So, this is a general phenomenon. Let us look at  29:02another quick example. So, f of x, y is 2x comma  y. So, if you look at the ordered bases 1,0 and  29:091,1 you can look at. So, f of 1,0 is just 2,0,  f of 1,1 is 2,1 and you can write this in terms  29:17of our bases that you have 1,0 and 1,1. So,  these bases is if you want beta and gamma both.  29:25And as a result, the corresponding matrix  is the coefficients coming from here,  29:29coefficients which go into the first column,  coefficients from there, which go into the  29:33first, second column, so it is 2,1,0,1. Instead, you can look at the standard ordered  29:39basis. So, this is this time your beta prime and  gamma prime, and it is clear it is 2x comma y.  29:45So, f of 1,0 is 2,0 f of 00,1 is 0,1, so this  is scaling your first vector by 2 and it is  29:54returning your second vector as it is. So,  this gives us a diagonal matrix 2,0,0,1.  30:02So let P be 1,1,0,1 P inverse is  1 minus 1,0 you can compute this.  30:07And now if you compute P inverse AP, this is a  very simple calculation, which I have done here,  30:11you get your diagonal matrix, which is exactly the  matrix B. So, this is exactly B, so the matrices  30:192,1,0,1 and 2,0,0,1 are similar. So, we have seen two examples where  30:24we took linear transformations from  two vector spaces to themselves  30:31expressed each time these linear transformations  as basis with the same basis on both sides,  30:41and then we change the basis. Again,  with the new basis on both sides,  30:46we computed the matrix and we saw  that these matrices are similar.  30:51So, this is a general phenomenon, and  the proof for this is exactly the same.  30:55So, consider a linear transformation T, V to  V and two ordered bases beta and gamma for V.  31:00Let A be the corresponding matrix with respect  to beta and B be the corresponding matrix with  31:06respect to gamma, then A is similar to B. So, that  means I have to produce P. How do I produce P?  31:12To produce P you write, so express,  so we want that B is P inverse  31:23AP, so express, so for P you express  the, you express gamma in terms of beta,  31:40and P inverse is well you can get it from P by  inverting or you can get it from B by expressing  31:48beta in terms of gamma. What does this mean? This  means you take each in an ordered way, you take.  31:56So, this first one means you take the first vector  of gamma, write it as a linear combination of  32:05elements of the vectors from beta, take the second  vector of gamma write it as a linear combination  32:10of beta and so on, so you get that. So, if you have n many, you write all those n many  32:16things, and then you get a matrix. For the first  equation that you have put the coefficients into  32:23the first column, for the second equation, put  them into the second column and so on for the nth  32:27equation, put them into the nth column, that is  your matrix P. Same thing, but the opposite way,  32:33that is your matrix P inverse or you can get it  just by inverting P. And you will find that you  32:41end up with B is P inverse AP. So, again, it  is not a proof-based course, I would not prove  32:46this fact, but this is how you get P fine. Why do we care about similarity? I mean, this is  32:52maybe the most important question. So, the reason  is that, as we saw in the previous two examples,  33:01sometimes. So, we hope, so, the underlined  part is we hope, because under some basis,  33:09we hope that the corresponding matrix is a  diagonal matrix, which gives an easy geometric  33:16understanding of the linear transformation. So, if you have a diagonal matrix, as I said it  33:21saying that some particular vector scales, some  other particular vector scales and some third  33:27vector letting our three scales  and give me how much it scales by  33:30and these three form a basis. So, that is  the intuitive picture you have in mind.  33:37So, let us quickly recall what we have done this  video. We have seen the notion of similarity and  33:43equivalence of matrices. Equivalence was,  both of these are equivalence relations.  33:50Equivalence is for rectangular matrices, I mean,  which means matrices which need not be square.  33:57So, we say they are equivalent to B is  QAP, then A and B are equivalent.  34:02For similarity, we say that B is P inverse  AP, I mean, if these B is P inverse AP then  34:08we say A and B are similar. And these notions are  you are useful because they sort of help you to  34:16understand how to go between different basis  on the vector space if you want if you have  34:22a particular linear transformation and you  choose different basis, how do you go between  34:27the corresponding matrices that is really what  equivalence and similarities telling you.  34:31And similarity is particularly important because,  it may so, happen that your linear transformation  34:37may not, the algebra that when you write  it down, it may look like a very difficult  34:45entity, but under some particular basis, it  may suddenly start looking very nice. This  34:51is really the main point behind why we study  similar. So, thank you for your attention.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.