---
title: "L2.3 Solutions to a system of linear equations with an invertible coefficient matrix :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L2.3 Solutions to a system of linear equations with an invertible coefficient matrix :: IITM Online Degree

L2.3 Solutions to a system of linear equations with an invertible coefficient matrix

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the maths 2 component of  the online BSC degree in Data Science. In the  00:20last video we have seen something called Cramer's  rule which was used to solve a system of equations  00:27in which the coefficient matrix is square  and its determinant is non-zero.  00:33Today we are going to continue on that theme  and we are going to talk about the solution of  00:38a system of linear equations with an invertible  coefficient matrix. So, we hinted on this  00:46in the last video and we want to continue with  that theme. So, for quite some time we will talk  00:52first about the invertibility of a square matrix,  what is its relation with the determinant and then  00:58move on to the answer to this question about  what is the solution and how we can get it.  01:07So, let us recall quickly what is a square  matrix? A square matrix is a matrix in  01:11which the number of rows is the same as the  number of columns. So, here is an example,  01:16so the first one is a 3 by 3 example, the  second one is a 2 by 2 example. So, a non  01:22example would be something which has 2 rows and  3 columns or let us say 5 rows and 8 columns.  01:28So, let us recall what is the inverse of a square  matrix. So, if you have an n by n matrix then the  01:34inverse of A is another n by n matrix B such that  A times B is B times A is identity. Now, I will  01:43point out that B has to be n by n otherwise this  multiplication on both sides is not defined as we,  01:50the number of columns of the first  matrix has to be the same as number  01:52of rows of the second matrix in order for  them to be multiplied. So, that forces B  01:57to have the same number of rows and columns  as A, if this identity were to be satisfied  02:05and recall of course, that the identity matrix  is the diagonal matrix with all ones.  02:11So, the inverse is denoted by A inverse, now I  am using already in this The inverse of a square  02:18matrix, so I should qualify the The before that,  let us see an example, so here is an example,  02:25so you have the matrix 4, 7, 2 ,6 2 by 2  matrix and you can take B to be 0.6, minus 0.7,  02:37minus 0.2, 0.4 of course, you can wonder where  did I come with these values from, was it trial  02:44and error or how did I come up with them. So,  that we will study that in a few slides.  02:50Anyhow if you multiply these you get identity  and if you multiply it on the other side also  02:55you get identity, so this second matrix  is the inverse of the first matrix  03:01and similarly, the first matrix is the inverse of  the second matrix. So, if I call this A and this B  03:07then A is B inverse and B is A inverse. Now, how do I know that  03:15there is no other matrix which satisfies the same  thing? So, maybe A inverse B has this and then  03:23some other C also could have the same property.  So, how do I know that A inverse is this matrix  03:30and not some other matrix C? So, this is what  is called uniqueness, so the inverse is unique  03:40which is why I am using the word The and this is a  standard argument in something called group theory  03:48but let us go through it now. So, suppose there are two  03:52matrices with this property so AB is BA is  the identity and AC is CA is the identity,  04:03then what do we do? We compute this matrix  C times A times B, first of all note that  04:11all of them are n by n matrices, so this product  makes sense, second one of the properties that we  04:17saw for matrix multiplication was that it does not  matter which order you, it was that, it does not  04:23matter whether you first do A times B or first  do C times A and then multiply that to B.  04:29So, in other words we could either do this or  we could do this and they are both the same,  04:36but let us compute each of these and see what  we get. so, if you first do A times B, then you  04:42get well A times B is the identity matrix, so  C times the identity matrix but anything times  04:48identity is itself. So, C times identity is C,  on the other hand if you first compute C times A  04:56you get the identity matrix times B, but identity  times any matrix is itself, so we get B.  05:03So, what did this show? This showed that B must be  C. So, in other words if two matrices satisfy this  05:12relation that A times B is B times A is identity,  then they must be the same, so we are saying that  05:19the inverse is unique. Of course, we do  not know if it exists or not, as we saw  05:23there was a condition for it to exist. Namely, we saw that the determinant must  05:32be non-zero, how did that come about? That  was because we saw that the determinant is  05:36multiplicative, meaning determinant of A times  B is determinant of A times determinant of B.  05:42So, if you take determinant of A times A inverse  that is determinant of the identity which is 1,  05:48so that means determinant of A  inverse times determinant of A is 1,  05:52and that means in particular  that neither of them can be  05:560, they have to be non-zero otherwise the product  cannot be 1, 0 times anything is 0 as we know.  06:03So, this is a necessary condition for a matrix  to be invertible. So, if the determinant  06:13is 0, so determinant of A is 0, then the matrix A  cannot be invertible, that means it cannot have an  06:20inverse. So, we say a matrix is invertible if  it has an inverse. So, the conclusion here is  06:28that The inverse of A exists implies that  the determinant of A has to be non-zero,  06:35we can go the other way and ask what about the  converse? So, if the determinant is non-zero  06:44is A invertible, meaning does an inverse of  A exist? So let us maybe do an example.  06:52So, let us do a 2 by 2 example. So, suppose  A is a, b, c, d and I am trying to look for  07:04its inverse and what do I know? I  know determinant of A is non-zero,  07:08so determinant of A is well let us calculate  what that is, that is a d minus b c,  07:14that is how we define the determinant of a 2 by  2 matrix. So, now I know that this is non-zero,  07:26that is what I am given. So, now let us try and find an inverse. What does  07:30the inverse satisfy? So, the inverse satisfies  that if you take a, b, c, d and if I multiply  07:41suppose, there is an inverse  and it is called e, f, g, h  07:44then I should get 1, 0, 0, 1. So, that means  I will get a bunch of equations and I can try  07:55to solve them. So, what equations  do I get? I get ae plus bg is 1,  08:03af plus bh is 0 and then ce plus dg is 1  and cf plus dh is 0, my bad, ce plus dg is  08:210 and not 1 and cf plus dh is 1. So, this is  what we get, these four equations are what  08:30we get by multiplying the left hand side,  that is how we do product of matrices.  08:35Maybe I will multiply the first  equation by d. So, ade plus bdg is d  08:47and maybe I will multiply the third  equation by b, so bce plus bdg  09:04is 0, that is what I get. So, now I can subtract  out the bdg, so if I do that what do I get?  09:12I get ad minus bc times e is d, so what  does that tell me? That tells me that e is  09:24d divided by ad minus bc and this is the  important part, I can divide because ad minus  09:29bc is non-zero, that is the assumption otherwise I  would not have been able to solve this at all.  09:38And then you can work out the rest, so from  here what we will get is that the inverse of A  09:44has this form, so it is 1 by ad minus bc times  the matrix da and I hope my signs are correct, so  09:59I have c here and a b here and then my bad,  this should be c here with a minus sign and  10:17a minus b over here. So, my claim is A inverse is  going to be of this form and I will leave you to  10:23check that the other entries give you exactly  this. So, you can see that for a 2 by 2 matrix  10:30if the determinant is non-zero, then indeed  the matrix is invertible, it has an inverse,  10:39so can I go beyond? So, the converse  is true, at least for 2 by 2 matrices,  10:45so what we are going to see next is  how to go beyond the 2 by 2 case.  10:50So, I am going to introduce a few notations,  so the adjugate of a square matrix,  10:56so what is that? So, remember in the previous  video, we defined something called minors and  11:06cofactors, so the i, j-th minor is the determinant  of the sub matrix obtained by deleting the i-th  11:14row and the j-th column and we denoted it  by an Mij. And the i, j-th cofactor was  11:20defined as multiplying the minor, the i, j-th  minor by minus 1 to the power i plus j.  11:29So, we can create a matrix called the cofactor  matrix, so the cofactor matrix has i, j-th  11:34entry Cij and then we define the adjugate of this  matrix A that you started with as the transpose of  11:46this cofactor matrix. So, remember that we defined  transpose, so transpose was when you take a matrix  11:53and you flip the entries about its diagonals,  you reflect the entries about the diagonal.  11:59So, let us see an example of the computation  of the adjugate matrix. So, here is the matrix  12:05A which is 1, 2, 3 in the first row 0, 2,  8 in the second row, 5, 6, 0 in the third  12:11row. Let us compute its minors first, well let us  compute its determinant first, determinant of A is  12:18well 1 times 2 times 0 minus 8 times 6  minus two times 0 times 0 minus 8 times 5  12:26plus 3 times 0 times 6 minus 2 times 5  and if you work that out that is minus  12:3248 plus 80 minus 30, so that is 2. So, let us now work out the minors, so  12:43well the minors are written here, I guess you  have to work out these minors by yourself. So,  12:49just to check that the M11 is correct,  that is exactly the number appearing  12:55in the bracket corresponding to 1 in  that expression for the determinant of A.  13:00so, that is minus 48, 1 times minus 48, the  first term in that expression for determinant of  13:07that is minus 1, that is exactly M11, why  is that M11? Because that is what you get by  13:14hiding the first row and the first column, so you  get 2, 8, 6, 0, 2 times 0 minus 8 times 6.  13:21So, you can check the other entries, so the other  minors and hopefully you will get these numbers.  13:27So, now let us write down the cofactor matrix,  so the cofactor matrix remember is given by  13:33taking these minors and putting them  into the corresponding positions but  13:39by multiplying each of them by a  minus 1 to the power i plus j. so,  13:43the first term remains the same because it is  minus 1 to the power 1 plus 1, so it is minus 48,  13:48the second term comes with a minus sign so its  minus of minus 40 which is 40, third term is again  13:541 times minus 10 so just minus 10 and so on. So, you have 18, minus 15, 4 and then 10, minus 8,  14:042\. So, this is your cofactor matrix, again this  is something you have to compute by yourself  14:12but I hope the ideas are clear, that to  compute the adjugate you have to compute the  14:18minors first, to compute the minors for Mij  you hide the i, j-th row in the j-th column  14:23and compute the resulting matrix and then  put those into multiply that by minus 1 to  14:30the power i plus j and put that into a matrix  that will give you the cofactor matrix.  14:34And then to get the adjugate  matrix you take this same  14:38cofactor matrix, let us just see what that was,  that was minus 48, 40, minus 10, 18, minus 15, 4,  14:4510, minus 8, 2 and you flip it over the diagonal,  you take its transpose. So, your minus 48, 40, 10,  14:52minus 10 became now the first column. So,  just to check here, it is the first row,  14:58here it is the first column and so on. So,  your second row became the second column,  15:02your third row became the third column, so  18, minus 15, 4 here is your second row that  15:09becomes a second column and then 10,  minus 8, 2 becomes a third column.  15:16So, you have taken the transpose of the  cofactor matrix. So, for your matrix A  15:22we have computed the adjugate matrix. So,  now let us do something funny, let us compute  15:29A times 1 by determinant of A times adjugate of A.  So, this 1 by determinant of A times adjugate of  15:35A is supposed to be a matrix and 1 by  determinant of A times adjugate of A  15:40that matrix multiplied by A. So, let us do this computation,  15:44well 1 by determinant of A times adjugate A, so we  computed what is the determinant of A, that was 2,  15:50so that means you have to multiply adjugate by  half, so if you multiply the adjugate by half the  15:57first row becomes minus 24, 9, 5, the second row  becomes 20, minus 15 by 2, minus 4, the third row  16:05becomes minus 5, 2, 1 and we want to multiply  on the left this same matrix by 2, by A.  16:12So, your matrix A was 1, 2, 3, 0, 2, 8, 5, 6,  0 something you can check from your previous  16:18slide. So, now let us multiply and see what we  get, so let us let me do the one by one term and  16:23then the rest I leave to you to check what we or  some of the terms and the rest I leave to you to  16:29check what we get. So, the first term is 1 times  minus 24 plus 2 times 20 plus 3 times minus 15  16:37that is minus 24 plus 40 minus 50, so  that is 40 minus 39, that is a 1.  16:47And then the next term, let us say the 1, 2 term,  so 1 times 9 plus 2 times minus 15 plus 3 times 2  16:58so that is 9 minus 15 plus 6, so 15 minus 15 that  is a zero and you can carry on and do the other  17:08terms so you are going to get 1, 0, 0, 0, 1 let  us do this term just for fun. So, this is the 2,  17:163 term, so that is 0 times 5 plus 2 times minus  4 plus 8 times 1, clearly that is 0 and then the  17:23rest is going to be 0, 0, 1. So, this is going  to give you the identity matrix and now you can  17:30do it the other way and you can check that  you still get the identity matrix.  17:37So, if you multiply minus 24, 9, 5, 20, minus  15 by 2, minus 4, minus 5, 2, 1 that is 1 by  17:47determinant of A times adjugate A and multiply  A on the right you are still going to get the  17:52identity matrix. So, what does that tell you?  That tells you that the inverse, A inverse is  18:00that is for this example is 1 by  determinant of A times adjugate of A,  18:04well it turns out that this is a  general fact and that is exactly what  18:12we are going to state here. So, if A is an n by n matrix  18:15and determinant of A is non-zero, then A  inverse exists and equals 1 by determinant  18:20of A times adjugate of A. So, how do we get this  relationship? So, if you remember in the previous  18:31video we had these 2 very nice formulae about  cofactors. So, one was that summation aij cij, so  18:45this is a determinant of A where you take the sum  from 1 through n. So, now let us divide both sides  18:59by determinant of A, if you do that and then we  will take the determinant of A inside the sum.  19:04So, if you do that what we get is summation  aij times 1 by determinant of A times  19:13cij, j is 1 through n, this is 1 and now we  can write this term over here as the ji-th term  19:27of the adjugate, so this is the same as summation  aij adjugate of A ji, why is that? Because cij  19:44transpose, my bad, including the determinant of  A, sorry, so this times 1 by determinant of A,  19:56so that is because cij is the same as  adjugate of A ji because adjugate of A  20:02is the cofactor matrix transpose. So, this is 1 but this is exactly the,  20:13so summation aij 1 by  determinant of A adjugate of A  20:21ji, so this is 1, so j is 1 through n, so what  does this mean? This means that if you take the  20:33ii-th entry of the matrix A  times 1 by determinant of A  20:43adjugate of A, if you take the ii-th, entry then  the ii-th entry is 1, the diagonal entry is 1.  20:51So now we can ask what happens  to entries which are not  20:55on the diagonal. So, for that we will have to  do summation aij c let us say kj, why do we care  21:07about this, because if you work out in the same  way, if you back calculate you will get here.  21:15So, I will leave it to you to back calculate, so  what I am saying is you take this matrix and look  21:20at its ik-th entry, where i is not equal to k,  then this is exactly what you are going to get,  21:29well not this but this times determinant of A. So,  this times 1 by determinant of A, but the point is  21:37this thing over here is 0 and why is it 0, where i  is not k, why is it 0? Well that is because we can  21:44think of this as the determinant of a matrix in  which the i-th row is the same as the i-th row of  21:53A and the k-th row is also the same as the  i-th row, so two rows are same in this.  22:02So you can think of this as a determinant of a  matrix with two rows the same, namely all rows of  22:10A are exactly the rows of this matrix except the  k-th one and the k-th one what do we have? We have  22:17the i-th row. And in the i-th row what do we have?  We have the i-th row. So, two rows are the same  22:21and we have seen in the last video that if two  rows are the same then the determinant is 0,  22:27so that is why this thing is 0. And from here it will follow that  22:33the ik-th entry is also 0, so we will get that  A times 1 by determinant A adjugate of A is  22:41the identity matrix. Similarly, you can flip  it around and work with columns and you will  22:48get that is also the identity matrix, so that  is how we get this formula for A inverse.  22:56So, now let us get to what we really wanted to do,  namely we want to find the solution of a linear,  23:03system of linear equations where the coefficient  matrix is invertible. So, I will repeat what  23:09that means, the coefficient matrix is invertible  means that it has an inverse which means the same  23:15as its determinant is non-zero that is what we  have seen, that if the determinant is non-zero,  23:21then it has an inverse and of course, if it  has an inverse the determinant is non-zero.  23:27So, let us look at the system of linear equations  Ax equals b where the coefficient matrix A is an  23:32invertible matrix, so let us multiply both  sides by A inverse, so if we multiply both  23:38sides by A inverse what do we get? So, here is  Ax equals b, multiply both sides by A inverse  23:48and when I multiply on the left notice that this  is matrix multiplication, so it does not matter  23:55whether I first look at A inverse  A or first look at A times x.  24:00So since it is to my advantage I will multiply A  24:03inverse and A first and what do  I get? I get the identity matrix,  24:08so the identity matrix times x is A inverse b,  but identity times anything is that thing itself,  24:14so identity times x is x. So, we get x is A  inverse b, so this is the solution. So, we wanted  24:22to find the solution and here is the explicit  form for the solution x is A inverse b.  24:30So, let us do an example, so here is an example  that we actually computed from much, much before,  24:39so this was actually something to do  with price of rice and dal and so on. So,  24:468x1 plus 8x2 plus 4x3 is 1960, 12x1 plus 5x2  plus 7x3 is 2215, 3x1 plus 2x2 plus 5x3 is 1135,  24:57well I should say 1960, 2215 and 1135. So, let us  form the corresponding system of linear equations,  25:10that is this is, this A is the coefficient matrix  8, 8, 4, 12, 5, 7, 3, 2, 5, x is the unknowns, the  25:19column vector of unknowns and b is the  column vector of the constants 1960, 2215  25:28and 1135. So, now the first thing we want  to check is what is determinant of A.  25:35So, determinant of A we can compute this and the  computation is, we know how to do this now it  25:41gives you minus 188 which is non-zero, which is  really all we care about. So once it is non-zero  25:49that means A is invertible and we know explicitly  what the solution is. It is A inverse times b,  25:57so now what we have to do is we have to compute  A inverse and then we have to multiply it with b.  26:02So, how do we compute A inverse well? We have to find the minors,  26:07this is what the minors are so 11, 39, 9, 32, 28,  minus 8, 36, 8, minus 56 you will have to do this,  26:16I trust now we can all compute determinants  and so you will be able to do this. So,  26:21just to reiterate to compute the 3, 2 minor you  have to hide the third row and the second column  26:28and compute the determinant of the remaining  matrix. So, from the minors we can get the  26:32co-factor matrix, how do we do that? We multiply  each of these by minus 1 to the power i plus j,  26:37so that is how we get the cofactor matrix.  26:40And then we can form the adjugate matrix, the  adjugate is the transpose of the cofactor matrix,  26:46so that is what we get and then A inverse is 1  by determinant of A times the adjective, so 1 by  26:53minus 188 which is what we found the determinant  to be times the adjugate matrix which is up here.  27:01And then what is x? Which is the solution,  the solution is A inverse b, so you multiply  27:08all these and then finally what you get is 45,  125, 150 which means x1 is 45, x2 is 125, x3  27:16is 150. Now, I will ask you to compare this with  the solution you got, we worked this out when we  27:23did systems of linear equations. So, look at that  video and observe that we got the same thing.  27:29So, finally we want to look at something called  the homogeneous system of linear equations.  27:34So, what is the homogeneous system of linear  equations? When you write it as Ax equals b,  27:39so now A need not be a square matrix, so  you could have m equations in n unknowns  27:47but the b is 0, yeah, the constants appearing  here, so these are all 0. So, this is 0,  27:55all these are 0. So, if these are 0 it is called  a homogeneous system of linear equations.  28:01Now, if it so happens that you have a  homogeneous system of linear equations,  28:10so that means the matrix form is Ax is equal  to 0 and this is a square matrix, so A square,  28:18so I should have added that over here, so if A  is an invertible matrix, then we know exactly  28:24what the solution is, it is A inverse b but b is  0 here, so that means x is 0. So, a homogeneous  28:32system of linear equations with n equations  in n unknowns, so it has a unique solution 0,  28:38if its coefficient matrix is invertible so that is  the same as saying its determinant is non-zero and  28:44here is something extra, it has an infinite number  of solutions if its coefficient matrix is not  28:51invertible, that means its determinant is 0. So, now we know explicitly that if you have n  28:58equations in n unknowns, then either and your  system is homogeneous, so you are solving Ax is 0,  29:07if the determinant of A is non-zero then the  solution is A inverse 0 which is 0. And if the  29:13determinant is 0, then you have an infinite number  of solutions, so the first part is something we  29:19did, the second part is something I am stating  and we will do this in the next video. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.