---
title: "L6.2: Image and kernel of linear transformations :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L6.2: Image and kernel of linear transformations :: IITM Online Degree

L6.2: Image and kernel of linear transformations

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component  of the online B.Sc. program on data science.  00:19In this video we are going to study  the notion of the image and kernel  00:23of linear transformations. So, remember previously  that we have studied the notion of the null space,  00:29so this is some, for a matrix. So, this is some  analogues thing for a linear transformation.  00:35So, for a matrix we know what is the row space or  the column space and that is, the analogous notion  00:41for a linear transformation is the image. So, let us start by, from the definitions.  00:48So, let f V to W be a linear transformation and  define the kernel of f, which is denoted by ker  00:55of f as kernel of f is all those vectors v, such  that f of v is 0. So, V and W are vector spaces,  01:03f is a linear transformation and we are looking  at all those vectors so that f of v is 0. Now,  01:09it is easy to check that kernel of v, a kernel of  f is actually a subspace of V, which means it is  01:15a vector space in its own right. What that means  is if you take a linear combination of elements of  01:21kernel of v, they still belong to kernel of v. Define the image of f. This is denoted by  01:29Im of f. Sometimes we will use a little  i and sometimes we will use capital I.  01:33So, that may, that notation will be a bit vague.  So, we will define it as all those vectors w.  01:43So, that there exists v in V. So, that w is equal  to f of v. So, this is nothing but the usual  01:50definition of the range of a function. If you  have a function between two spaces or two sets, we  01:57call the range of f as the set of values which the  function takes. So, that this is exactly the range  02:04of the function. So, image of f is another name  for the range of the function f. And I think you  02:09have studied range of a function in Maths 1. In case you have not, I just recall for you that  02:15range of a function is the set of  values which the function f takes.  02:22So, anyway, if you did not follow what I just  said, we will anyway look at some examples.  02:29Before that, let me also comment on the previous  slide that the image of f is also a subspace of W.  02:36So, if two vectors are in the image, the sum is  also in the image, because you can take, so if w1  02:42is f of v1 and w2 is f of v2, then you can look  at f of v1 plus v2 that is exactly w1 plus w2  02:50because remember f is a linear transformation and  that means w1 plus w2 is also in the image.  02:55Similarly, if you have alpha  times w, where w is in the image,  03:00then w is f of v. So, you look at alpha times  v, then f of alpha v is alpha times f of v is  03:07alpha times w. So, alpha w is also in the image.  Both of these remember use, I mean, in the proofs  03:15that I gave, the statements that I just made,  the fact that it is a linear transformation was  03:20crucially used. So, this is not true for  functions and so on for other things.  03:26So, let us look at some examples to get  our idea straight. So, look at the function  03:33from R2 to R2, f of x, y is 2x comma y. First  of all, why is this a linear transformation,  03:38because each coordinate is a linear combination.  Remember that linear combinations, if each  03:44coordinate is a linear combination that is exactly  what a linear transformation is when it comes to  03:50functions from Rn to Rm. So, 2x is  a linear transformation of x and y,  03:56and y is a linear transformation  of x and y. So, this is indeed a  04:03linear transformation. So, each  of these are linear combinations.  04:06So, this is a linear transformation. So, what is the kernel of f? The kernel of f is  04:11all those values so that f of that number x comma,  that vector x comma y is 0. 0 where, 0 in the  04:24codomain R2. So, 0 in the vector space R2. So,  0 in R2 is 0 comma 0. So, in the previous slide  04:30also note that we said f of v is equal to 0.  By that 0 we mean the 0 in W. So, here we have,  04:40we want to look for those x, y such that f of x,  y is equal to 0 comma 0. So, it is clear that if  04:462x comma y is 0 comma 0, then 2x is 0 and y is  0, which will tell us that x is 0 and y is 0.  04:53So, the kernel is exactly 0 comma 0. So, the  kernel is the 0 element or the 0 vector in R2.  05:01What is the image of f? The image of f is the  entire R2. Why is that? So, if you want to write  05:07a vector W in R2 as the image of some element,  then what would you do? You would look at,  05:18suppose w is equal u comma v,  then you look at u by 2 comma v.  05:23And if you apply f on u by 2 comma v, you get 2  times u by 2, which is u and v. So, that tells us  05:32that u comma v is in the image. So, every vector  u comma v is in the image that means the image is  05:39the entire space R2, the entire vector space. Consider the example, R2 to R2, f of x, y is 2x  05:47comma 0. Again, this is a linear transformation  because each coordinate is a linear combination.  05:54So, what is the image and what is the kernel?  So, kernel of f is 0 comma y. Why is this?  06:03Suppose f of x, y is equal to 0, we want to,  from there we want to solve for x comma y.  06:10So, that means 2x comma 0 is equal to 0 comma  0. That means 2x is 0 and 0 is equal to 0.  06:16So, 0, 0 does not yield us anything on  x comma y, any restriction on x comma y.  06:242x equals 0 yields us the restriction x is  equal to 0, that means y can be anything. So,  06:31the kernel of f is 0 comma y. So, this is the  entire y-axis. 0 comma y is the y-axis.  06:41And what is the image of f? Image of f is,  well, you have f of x comma y is 2x comma 0. So,  06:47now suppose you look for an element u comma v and  you ask when can u comma v be equal to 2x comma 0.  06:55So, the first thing you need is that v is 0. That  means this element must, this vector must lie on  07:01the x-axis. And then you have to ask whether on  the x-axis it can take all possible values.  07:09So, you get the equation u is 2x, which  if you solve, you get x is u by 2,  07:14which means if you put x comma  y equal to u by 2 comma 0,  07:19then the image of that element f of  x comma y is u comma 0. So, you get  07:28that every element, every vector on the x-axis  is indeed in the image. And you already saw that  07:35the image is contained in the x-axis that  means the image is equal to the x-axis.  07:41So, let us go on to studying the  07:47relation between the kernel and injectivity,  which, so we remember that a function is  07:57injective or one-one, if f of v1 is equal to  f of v2 implies v1 is equal v2 and for linear  08:04transformations this is the same as demanding that  f of v 0 implies v is 0. We prove this actually.  08:13So, what does this have to do with the kernel?  Well, the first one may, you may not be,  08:17it may not be clear, but the second statement  makes it clear what it has to do with the kernel.  08:23F v equals 0 implies v is 0. So,  08:29if a linear transformation is one-one or injective  then the kernel must be 0. That is what we are  08:37saying, because if f of v is 0, then v must be  0. So, the only possible choices of vectors which  08:44yield that f of v is 0 is the 0 vector itself. So,  if f is one-one or injective, then the kernel of f  08:51is 0. On the other hand, if the kernel is 0, that  means whenever f of v is 0, v is 0, so that means  09:00the condition for being one-one is satisfied.  So, kernel of f is 0 also means that  09:06the linear transformation is one-one. So, being the linear transformation being one-one  09:11is equivalent to kernel of f is 0. That is what we  have proved here. So, linear transformation f is  09:20one-one if and only if kernel of f is 0. So, what  do I mean by kernel of f is 0. What I mean here  09:27is that it is a 0 subspace. So, this should be  better written as kernel of f is the 0 subspace,  09:37which means it consists of the  set 0. And remember, 0 itself is a  09:44vector space. It satisfies all the properties  of a vector space. And it is a subset of V.  09:51So, it is a subspace of V. So, kernel of f  is the 0 subspace. That is what we mean by  09:56these two statements here. Kernel of f is 0  and kernel of f is 0. So, be careful when we  10:01write this. The 0 in this case here on the  right is a 0 subspace and not the 0 vector.  10:09It means it is a set  consisting of the 0 vector.  10:13So, let us again see the relation like kernel  is related to being injective let us study what  10:25is the relation between the image and the  subjectivity of a linear transformation.  10:30So, recall that a function f V, W is onto or  surjective if for each w in W there is some  10:39v in V such that f of v is w. In other words,  the range of this function is the entire W. So,  10:47this is actually, this part is the same for any  function. This is not, this has nothing to do with  10:55linear transformations per se, what  the statement in this slide.  10:59So, it follows from the definition that a function  f being onto is equal to range of f being W that  11:07is exactly what we just commented. So, for linear  transformations, in particular, this means that  11:12because remember range is the same as image, only  thing is when we say range we think of it as a set  11:18and when we say image we think of it as  a subspace. This is the main difference.  11:22Otherwise, there is no real difference  between the range and image as such.  11:28So, a linear transformation is onto if and only  the image of f is W. And this image of f is W is  11:36being concluded as a subspace. Image of f is  actually a subspace of W always and we say that  11:43it is onto. We have proved that it is onto, is  equivalent to the subspace image of f actually  11:49been the entire space. But this is not very  different from what happened for functions.  11:58Let us now proceed and make the connection  between kernels and null spaces. So, so far  12:04there is no matrix in the picture. So, now, we  are going to introduce some matrix in the picture  12:09and we will associate the kernel of this  linear transformation with that matrix.  12:17So, let f V to W be a linear transformation,  12:21let beta be v1, v2, vn and gamma be w1,  w2, wn which are both, both of which are  12:27ordered basis. Beta is an ordered basis of  V and gamma is an ordered basis for W.  12:34So, now, indeed we can talk about a matrix,  because remember in the previous video,  12:39we have talked about how we, if you  have a linear transformations along with  12:44an ordered basis for each of V and W, there is  a corresponding matrix. And how do we write down  12:50that matrix? That write, we write down that matrix  by looking at f of vi and expressing that in terms  12:57of wjs, as a linear combination of the wjs and  whatever coefficients we get go into the matrix.  13:04So, the coefficient of f, coefficients of f of  vi go into the ith column of that matrix.  13:13So, let A be the corresponding  matrix. So, just recall that for v in,  13:21so suppose v is summation cjvj then  f of v is equal to summation cj,  13:29f of vj that is by the linear transformation  property, axioms of being a linear transformation.  13:38And then, f of, so summation f of vj can be  further written as summation Aijwi. So, f of vj  13:52is summation Aijwi. So, that is corresponding the  jth column of the matrix A, that is what these,  14:02where these coefficients are coming from.  That is exactly what we just commented.  14:08So, when is f of v equal to 0? So,  f of v is 0 if and only if each  14:20coefficient in this linear combination of wis is  0. So, what is the coefficient of wi? So, you have  14:29to take that summation i is equal 1 to m outside  and take the summation j is equal to 1 to n inside  14:36and then you will get summation Aijcj over j that  is the coefficient of wi. And then we know that  14:47if you have a linear combination of wis which is  0 then each coefficient must be 0. Why is that,  14:52because wis are a basis, remember, and basis  satisfies that it is linearly independent.  14:59So, if summation of some linear combination,  this particular linear combination of  15:04wis is 0 then each coefficient is 0. So, f  of v 0 is exactly the same as saying that  15:12summation Aijcj is equal to 0. And now this  equation should ring a bell in your mind.  15:20So, the left hand side is saying, so f of v  is 0 means this is exactly the definition of  15:26v being in the kernel of f. And the right hand  side is saying that if you look at the vector c  15:32consisting of c1, c2, cn, then that  vector is in the null space of A.  15:39So, the relation we have between the  kernel and the null space is the following.  15:43That if you have a vector v, which when you  express as a linear combination of the vjs,  15:50there, remember, it is an ordered basis, so you  can write it as summation cjvj in a unique way.  15:56So, this vector is in the kernel if and only if  this happens precisely when if you write these  16:04coefficients of the vjs as a column, then  this column must be in the null space of  16:15the matrix A. So, that is the relation  between kernels and null spaces.  16:22So, let us similarly describe what is the relation  between images and column spaces? So, let V be a,  16:30f V to be W be a linear transformation, let beta  be v1, v2, vn, gamma be w1, w2, wn both of these  16:38are ordered basis, beta for V and gamma for W  and let A be the matrix corresponding to f with  16:44respect to beta and gamma. So, we know how to  write this. The jth column of A corresponds to  16:52the coefficients arising as  expressing f of vj in terms of wis.  16:58So, now, again recall that for v is summation vj,  cjvj in V, f of v summation cj summation Aijwi,  17:10which if you take the summations, interchange  the summations we can do that because  17:15it is a finite sum then you get that  this is summation i is 1 through m,  17:22summation cj, summation Aijcj times wi. So, the  coefficient of wi is summation Aijcj over j.  17:34So, suppose now w is summation diwi and  17:41it is, so this is a vector in W. So, these  dis are unique, because wis form of basis. So,  17:48you can write wis summation diwi. So,  when does this lie in the image.  17:56So, this lies in the image precisely when there  exists a scalar cj so that summation Aijcj is di.  18:09So, the scalars from the coefficients of something  in the image, something of the form f of v  18:17is summation Aijcj. So, that means these  di should be submission Aijcj in order for  18:28w to be f of v, where, what is v?  V is equal to summation cjvj.  18:36So, what that means is, we can  now express this in terms of  18:40columns. What it means is that summation diwi is  in image of f if there exists a column vector c  18:47such that the column vector d, which  is d1, d2, dm is equal to A times c.  18:56So, but remember A times c is exactly a  linear combination of the columns of A.  19:02So, what that means is that  19:07w is in the image of f where w is given  by submission diwi if and only if you  19:14look at the vector d is equal to d1, d2,  dm and this is in the column space of A.  19:20So, that is a relation between the image of  f and the column space of this matrix A.  19:28Now, let us see if we can  use this to find the basis  19:32of the kernel and the image of a linear  transformation. So, again let f V to W be a  19:38linear transformation, choose ordered basis  beta and gamma for V and W, respectively.  19:43Let A be the corresponding matrix. So, the  point, I mean, the first point here is that  19:53we can look at the kernel and the null  space and what we have really shown is that  20:01the kernel is isomorphic to the null  space. That is what really we showed  20:07in the slide on kernels and null spaces. Why is that? That is because for every element of  20:15the kernel, we have a unique element of the  null space. So, you can define a function and  20:21it is easy to verify that this is indeed a linear  transformation from the kernel to the null space.  20:29And it is also equally clear that this function  is both one-one and onto that something you can  20:36check. So, that tells us that the kernel is  actually isomorphic to the null space.  20:44So, in particular, if you look at the vectors  c11, c12, c1n, c21, c22, c2n and ck1, ck2, ckn  20:56these form a basis for the null space of A  precisely when v1, the corresponding v1 primes,  21:03v2 primes, vk primes lie in kernel of f, form a  basis for kernel of f. And what is the relation  21:10between vis and, vi primes and these columns?  The coefficients of vi prime when expressed in  21:18terms of vj are exactly corresponding to the  jth, the ith vector in this collection.  21:32So, in other words, what is the main point?  The main point is I can read off a basis  21:36for the kernel if I am, if I know how  to get a basis for the null space.  21:43And indeed, we do know how to get  a basis for the null space.  21:46Similar to the previous situation, we can find  the relation between images and column spaces  21:53specifically about basis between them using  the isomorphism that we have discussed earlier.  22:02So, if we consider the column vectors d11,  d12, d1m, d21, d22, d2m, dr1, dr2, drm  22:14then these form a basis for the column space of  A precisely when if you look at the corresponding  22:21linear combinations of the wis, wi prime is  summation j is 1 through m dijwj these form  22:30a basis for image of f. So, this follows because  of the previous isomorphism that was discussed.  22:40So, once we have this isomorphism note  also that if you look at the columns of A  22:46which form a spanning set of the column space,  then these correspond to the images of f of vi.  22:55So, the images f of vi which form  a spanning set for image of f.  23:01So, what is the point of all this? So, as we  have noted before, we can convert the problem of  23:09finding a basis for the image space to the problem  of finding a basis for the column space.  23:16And, well, that is something we know how to do,  because to find a basis of the column space,  23:22what do we do, we look at the columns, then we do  row reduction and once it is in row, reduced row  23:27echelon form, you look at the columns containing  the pivot elements, and then the original columns,  23:34those are the ones which form a basis for the  column space. So, now, what this is telling us is,  23:42once we know those columns which form a basis for  the column space, you look at the corresponding  23:51linear combinations of the wjs and that will  give you a basis for the image of f.  23:59So, this video, we have seen the notion of  image and kernel and we have discussed these  24:05relationships between the kernel and the null  space of the associated matrix once we fix basis,  24:12ordered basis, and similarly, the relationship  between the image of a linear transformation  24:19and the column space of a matrix which  we obtain by fixing ordered basis.  24:27So, we have seen that these are isomorphic. You  know the interplay between these two. And using  24:33these we can get basis by considering these  corresponding matrices that we obtain and then  24:42obtaining basis for those using row reduction,  which we know how to do from the last week. So,  24:48in the next video, we will implement all of  this in concrete examples. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.