---
title: "L6.3: Examples of finding bases for the kernel and image of a linear transformation :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L6.3: Examples of finding bases for the kernel and image of a linear transformation :: IITM Online Degree

L6.3: Examples of finding bases for the kernel and image of a linear transformation

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online B.Sc. program on data science00:18and programming. In this video, we are going to continue from the previous video where00:23we discussed the theory about the relationship between images and kernels for a linear transformation00:33with the column space and null space of the matrix that we obtain after we fix ordered00:41basis for the domain and the codomain.00:45So, we are going to do a bunch of examples, where we implement what we have seen earlier00:50and we will find basis for the kernel and the image using the fact that we can find00:57basis for the column space and the null space using row reduction.01:03Let us just recall first what I just said. So, we have defined in the previous video01:11what is the kernel of a linear transformation. For a linear transformation f V to W, let01:16A be the matrix corresponding to f after choosing ordered basis, beta which is v1, v2, vn and01:22gamma which is w1, w2, wm for V and W, respectively. How do I get this matrix?01:29Well, you apply f on vi and express that in terms of the w1, w2, wm and then the coefficients01:39that you get, you put all of them together and you get your m by n matrix. Once we choose01:43the basis v1, v2, vn we have this isomorphism Rn to V. And what is the isomorphism. If you01:49have a column vector in Rn, c1, c2, cn then that corresponds to the vector summation cjvj.01:57You take the corresponding linear combination that is the isomorphism from Rn to V.02:03And in the previous video, what we have discussed is that, if you consider the null space of02:09the matrix A, which is a subspace of Rn, then under this above isomorphism, that gives you02:20an isomorphism with the kernel of f. This was the import of the first part of the previous02:26video. So, in particular, if we can get a basis of the null space of A, then using this02:32isomorphism, we can translate it to a basis of the kernel of f. That is one of the things02:37we will do in this video for concrete examples.02:41Similarly, we define the image of a linear transformation. And once again, we can choose02:47ordered basis and then we get the matrix A. And now we have an isomorphism from Rm to02:55W. This is because of the choice of ordered bases w1 to wm. So, if you have a vector d1,03:02d2, dm, corresponding to that vector, you have the linear combination summation djwj.03:08The main point here is that, if you look at the column space of A, which notice is a subspace03:16of Rm, then under this isomorphism, its image will be exactly the image of f. So, that is03:26what we discussed in the previous video when we talked about the relation between image03:32and column space.03:34And in particular, what this will do is, it will tell you that if you can get a basis03:39of the column space, then by using this isomorphism, you can also get a basis for the image of03:45f and we will implement this in some examples now.03:49So, let us do this example. Consider the linear transformation from R4 to R3 defined by T03:57of x1, x2, x3, x4, which is 2 times x1 plus 4 times x2 plus 6 times x3 plus 8x4, x1 plus04:053x2, 5x4 and x1 plus x2 plus 6x3 plus 3x1. So, the first thing we have to do is choose04:15ordered basis. So, let us choose the ordered basis to be the standard basis for R4 and04:20R3. So, once we do that, what is a corresponding matrix where it is exactly the coefficients04:28of, that are appearing this in this linear transformation. The first row is the coefficients04:35appearing the first equation. So, those are 2, 4, 6, 8 and then a 1, 3, 0, 5 and then04:431, 1, 6, 3.04:45So, let us row reduce. So, if you row reduce, well, what do I want to do? Maybe before I04:51row reduce, let us ask, we want to get the basis for the image and the kernel of f of04:59T and to do that, we have to get basis for the null space and the column space. And we05:08know how to do that that is why row reduction. So, that is why we are row reducing. So, if05:13you row reduce, well, we have a 2 in 1, 1 place, so we divide by 2. So, we get this05:17matrix 1, 2, 3, 4; 1, 3, 0, 5; 1, 1, 6, 3.05:22Sweep out the first column below the one. So, that is R2 minus R1 and R3 minus R1. So,05:28if we do that, we get the first row is unchanged 1, 2, 3, 4 and in the second row, we will05:33get 0, 1, minus 3, 1 and in the third row, we will get 0, minus 1, 3 and minus 1. So,05:44already you can see that the third row is a multiple of the second row. So, it is going05:49to get knocked out in one more step.05:55Well, in the one, so we are done with the first column. So, now we look at the 2, 2th06:00entry. It is conveniently 1. And so we can knock out the entry below that. So, that in06:07fact knocks out the entire third row by doing R3 plus R2. So, now this is already in pretty06:16good shape. But let us do one more step and convert it into reduced row echelon form.06:21So, to do that, we do R1 minus 2R2 and then that gives us 1, 0, 9 and 2 in the first row,06:31and then 0, 1, minus 3, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0.06:35So, that is the reduced row echelon form, so 1, 0, 9, 2, 0, 1, minus 3, 1, 0, 0, 0,06:430\. And from here, we can read off the basis for the null space and the column space. So,06:53let us look at first what are the non-pivot and the pivot element elements. So, the pivot06:57elements are in the 1, 1 and 2, 2 place. So, the non-pivot columns which will correspond07:04to independent variables are in the third and fourth columns. And that tells us that07:10x3 and x4 are the independent variables, x1 and x2 are dependent variables. And if we07:16put x3 is s and x4 is t, then we can use the first row and the second row to get the corresponding07:24equations. And from there, we will get that x1 is minus 9s minus 2t and x2 is 3s minus07:32t.07:33So, just to be clear, this is in order to get the basis for the null space. So, for07:39that, we have to look at the homogeneous equation. So, that is what, that is how we are getting07:44these equations for x1 and x2. And what that means is, if you substitute s is 1 and t 007:53or s is 0 and t is 1 this give you two basis vectors and that will contribute the basis08:00for the null space. So, if we do that, what do we get? So, if s is 1 and t 0, we get minus08:069, comma 9, comma 1, comma 0. And if s is 0 and t is 1, we get minus 2 comma, minus08:171 comma, 0 comma, 1. So, that is a basis for the null space.08:24And since we have chosen beta to be the standard ordered basis, the basis for the kernel of08:30t is exactly the same. So, it is minus 9 comma 3 comma 1 comma 0. How do I get that? That08:37is because we take the linear combination of the corresponding ordered basis. And in08:42this case, that is minus 9 times e1 plus 3 times e2 plus 1 times e3 plus 0 times e4,08:47which is the same as the vector you started with and similarly for the second one. So,08:51we have got a basis for the kernel of t.08:54To get a basis for the column space, note that the pivot columns are the first and second09:04columns. So, that means from the original matrix, if we look at the first two columns,09:12those will be a basis for the column space. So, that is the vectors 2, 1, 1, and 4, 3,09:171\. So, just to remind you, here is the matrix. So, the first two columns are, in the first09:25column we had 2, 1, 1, in the second column we had 4, 3, 1. That is a basis for the column09:31space.09:33So, that tells us that again, that since we choose the standard basis, the standard ordered09:43basis, the image of t also has the same basis. So, 2 times e1 plus 1 times e2 plus 1 times09:51e3 which is 2, 1, 1 and 4 times e1 plus 3 times e2 plus 1 times e3 which is 4, 3, 1.09:59So, I hope this example demonstrated how to implement what we studied in the previous10:06video.10:07Let us do one more example, where we will use basis which are not the standard basis10:12and so we will have to actually compute what the, what those linear combinations. So, let10:21us look at V is R2 and W is this subspace of R3, x, y, z, such that x plus y plus z10:30is 0. So, let us look at respective ordered pieces. So, beta is 1, 1 and 1, minus 1 for10:37R2. So, notice I am not using the standard ordered basis here, but the ordered basis10:421, 1, 1, minus 1. So, for gamma, let us choose the ordered basis minus 1, 1, 0 and minus10:481, 0, 1.10:52Let us look at the linear transformation, T of x, y is 0 comma x plus 2y comma minus10:57x minus 2y. So, of course, we know this is a linear transformation from R2 to R3. How11:05do I know it is a linear transformation to W? Well, if you look at the image, that is11:11inside W, because the vectors 0 comma x plus 2y comma minus x minus 2y satisfies that the11:19sum of these three is 0. So, 0 plus x plus 2y plus minus x minus 2y is indeed 0. So,11:26this is a linear transformation from V to W.11:30So, now let us write down the corresponding matrix. So, here, we will have to do some11:36work. So, here, we have to take the first vector in the basis, which is 1 comma 1, and11:44then apply T to that, if you apply T to that, you get, so T of 1, 1 is a 0 comma 3 comma11:52minus 3, and then we have to express that in terms of the basis gamma.12:03So, 0 comma 3 comma minus 3 is 3 times minus 1 comma 1 comma 0 plus minus 3 times minus12:141 comma 0 comma 1. This is something you can take. And that gives us our first column,12:17which is 3, minus 3.12:19Similarly, for the second basis vector, we have T of 1 comma minus 1, so that will give12:24us 1 minus 2, which is minus 1 and then minus 1 plus 2, which is 1. So, we get 0 comma minus12:331 comma 1 and again it is a check that this leads to the column minus 1, 1 in the second12:41column. So, this is our corresponding matrix. This is something we have done this in the12:47previous videos. So, I will encourage you to check this.12:51So, now, we want to get the basis for the column space and the null space of this matrix.12:59So, to do that, we will put it into reduced row echelon form. This is a particularly easy13:03matrix. So, you divide the first row by 3. So, you get 1, minus one-third, minus 3, 113:10and then sweep out this is actually clearly the second row is a multiple of the first.13:16So, you will get 1, minus 1 by 3, 0, 0. So, this is in reduced row echelon form already.13:23So, now, let us check out what are the pivot and non-pivot columns. So, the pivot column13:29is the first column. The non-pivot column is the second column. So, x1 is the corresponding13:35variables x1 is the dependent variable, x2 is the independent variable. And for the homogeneous13:41equation, x1 satisfies, so x1 minus one-third x2 is 0, so x1 is equal to one-third times13:49x2.13:50So, if you put x2 is t, then x1 is going to be given by t by 3. So, a basis for the null13:58space is we can obtain that by putting t is 1. So, if you do that, we get the singleton14:04set, which is a basis namely, one-third comma 1. So, this is a basis for the null space14:14of A. Now, from here, I want to get the basis for the kernel of t. So, remember, we have14:24chosen the basis 1 comma 1 and minus 1 comma 1, I just, sorry, 1 comma minus 1, beta is14:321 comma 1, 1 comma minus 1. So, now, we have to take that linear combination one-third14:40times 1 comma 1 plus 1 times 1 comma minus 1. So, if you evaluate that, that gives us14:474 by 3 comma minus 2 by 3. So, that is a basis for kernel of t.14:52Now, of course, you can simplify this basis. So, you can pull out the one-third or you15:01can pull out the two-third if you want and instead of this basis you can write this as15:062 comma minus 1, so that is another basis for kernel of t. So, similarly, let us go15:13about what happens to the column space. Let us see what happens to the column space of15:18A. So, that is, so to do that, we have to see what is the pivot column. So, the pivot15:27column was the first column. So, that means the first column of the original matrix which15:32was 3 minus 3 is a basis for the column space.15:38So, now, we have 3 comma minus 3. And so what we should do is take the linear combination15:453 times the first basis vector in gamma plus minus 3 times the second basis vector in comma.15:50So, if you do that, we get 3 times minus 1, 1, 0 plus minus 3 times minus 1 comma 0 comma15:561, and that gives us 0 comma 3 comma minus 3. So, this is a basis for the image of the16:04linear transformation t. So, I hope this example has again shed more light on the calculations16:12that we, the theory that we saw in the previous video.16:14So, let us end this video with the rank nullity theorem for linear transformations. We have16:20actually studied this theorem for matrices. So, now, because we have this very nice connection16:27between the null spaces and the kernel and image and the column space, we can convert16:37the rank nullity theorem for matrices into a theorem for linear transformations. So,16:44suppose T V to W is a linear transformation then the rank of T is the dimension of the16:50image of T. This is the definition. And the nullity of T is the dimension of kernel of16:56T.16:57So, based on what we have studied earlier, notice that in order to compute the rank,17:04we can choose ordered basis for the domain and codomain and using that we can get a matrix17:11and the rank of T will be exactly the rank of that matrix. And similarly, the nullity17:18of T will be exactly the nullity of that matrix.17:23So, if we reinterpret the rank nullity theorem for matrices, we will thus obtain rank of17:29T plus nullity of T is dimension of V. Why dimension of V, because remember that what17:36we will get is rank of the matrix plus nullity of the matrix is equal to n. What was n? N17:43was the number of columns in that matrix. But what is that number of columns? That number17:49of columns is corresponding to the dimension of V. So, hence we get dimension of V here.17:57So, I guess that ends this video. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.