---
title: "Week 06 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# Week 06 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree

Week 06 - Tutorial 01

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello everyone. Welcome to the tutorial video. So, in this video let us consider a matrix00:21representation of linear transformation. So, suppose I am considering a matrix to be like00:32this 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 and I am saying that this is the matrix representation of T for00:44some linear transformation T and my ordered basis which I have taken, let us consider00:50it as beta which is nothing but 1, 1, 0; 0, 1, 1, and 1, 0, 1.01:04So, with respect to these ordered basis for some linear transformation T I am getting01:11my matrix representation of this linear transformation to be this A matrix. So, I can write it as01:17T with respect to beta. So, beta for both domain and coronary. I am considering this01:26order basis in both the sets. Now my question is what is the, what is the matrix representation01:43of T? The matrix representation of T with respect to standard ordered basis of R3.02:08So, here what we are doing everything is in R3. So, standard ordered basis of R3 is nothing02:14but 1, 0, 0; 0, 1, 0 and 0, 0, 1. So, we have to find the matrix representation of T with02:28respect to standard ordered basis and so what we do? We will start with this given representation.02:36So, here observe that T 1, 1, 0 is nothing but 0 into 1, 1, 0 plus 0 into 0, 1, 1 plus02:510 into 1, 0, 1.02:54So, with respect to these ordered basis beta; with this beta, if I express this first vector03:04T 1, 1, 0, then I am getting the coefficient for these vectors as 0, 0 and 0 and that is03:11what come in this column. So, as this first column is nothing but 0, 0, 0, so the image03:16of this first vector 1, 1, 0 should be 0. That is what the matrix representation is.03:22So, similarly the second column is also 0, so the image of 0, 1, 1 is again the same03:34thing 0 into 1, 1, 0 plus 0 into 0, 1, 1 and 0 into 1, 0, 1; again it will be 0.03:43And what about the third one? The third column is 0, 0, 1, so if I take this last vector03:531, 0, 1, so for the first element it will be 0 because 0 is in the first position of04:03the first row of the third column. So, and the second is also 0, but the third will be04:131\. That is why we get 0, 0, 1 in the third column. So, it will give us 1, 0, 1. So, this04:25is 0 mean 0 comma 0 comma 0 as we are considering in R3. So, these are the images of the given04:32vectors in beta. So, what we get here, just we will write just in the next page.04:40So, let us write what we have got here. T of 1, 1, 0 that is 0. T of 0, 1, 1 that is04:59again 0 and T of 1, 0, 1 this is 1, 0, 1, the same write there. So, this we have got.05:14Now what we have to do? We have to express the standard ordered basis with respect to05:18these ordered basis. So, basically what we have to do? We have to express 1, 0, 0 the05:25first vector in the standard ordered basis in terms of this vectors of beta.05:32So, let me write express 1, 0, 0 as a linear combination of these 3 vectors. So, this is05:40the, like this expression. So, it is a plus c, a plus b and b plus c. So, a plus c will06:01be 1, a plus b will be 0 and b plus c will be 0 again. So, if we solve these 3 equations,06:11then we get our a to be half, b to be minus half and c to be half. If you solve these06:263 equations, you will get this as a solution, this is a unique solution.06:32So, 1, 0, 0 is nothing but half of this first vector 1 comma 1 comma 0; minus half of the06:44second vector 0 comma 1 comma 1 plus half of this third vector that is 1 comma 0 comma06:541\. So, you can express 1, 0, 0 in terms of these vectors in beta. Similarly, we can do06:59for others. So, others I am just writing here. 0, 1, 0 it will be half of 1 comma 1 comma07:100 plus half of 0 comma 1 comma 1 minus half of 1 comma 0 comma 1.07:23And for the last one, 0 comma 0 comma 1 is nothing but minus half of 1 comma 1 comma07:330 plus half 0 comma 1 comma 1 plus half 1 comma 0 comma 1. So, we expressed all the07:463 vectors in standard ordered basis in terms of the basis which was given as beta. So,07:53we got this expression. Now what we have to do? We have to apply T here. So, we have to07:58find the image of T 1 comma 0 comma 0. Similarly, we have to find T of 0 comma 1 comma 0 and08:10T of 0 comma 0 comma 1.08:15Now, if we apply T on 1 comma 0 comma 0 in this expression, so T is a linear transformation,08:24so we can take this scalar out and it will be T half into 1 comma 1 comma 0 minus half08:31into T of 0 comma 1 comma 1 and half into T of 1 comma 0 comma 1. So, for the first08:45two vectors T of 1 comma 1 comma 0 that is 0. T of 0 comma 1 comma 1 that is again 0.08:50So, it is nothing but half into T of 1 comma 0 comma 1 which is the same T of 1 comma 008:59comma 1. So, we get this vector.09:03Similarly, for the other two we can calculate that T of 0 comma 1 comma 0 is again minus09:12half of 1 comma 0 comma 1 and T of 0 comma 0 comma 1 is half of 1 comma 0 comma 1. So,09:27this we got. Now any vector x, y, z can be written as x into 1 comma 0 comma 0 plus y09:40into 0 comma 1 comma 0 plus z into 0 comma 0 comma 1. So, this we can do. So, T of x,09:54y, z is nothing but x of T of 1 comma 0 comma 0.10:02Again we are using the properties of linear transformation and we are getting this T of10:090 comma 1 comma 0 plus z into T of 0 comma 0 comma 1. So, if we write this, if we put10:23the values of T of 1 comma 0 comma 0 which we have calculated, so we get x into half10:33into 1 comma 0 comma 1 minus y into half into y comma 0 comma 1 plus z into half 0 comma,10:54sorry, 1 comma 0 comma 1. So, if we calculate this together and put all the things together,11:03we get half into x minus y plus z, 0, x minus y plus z.11:14So, this is the expression for T of x, y, z which were intended to find. Now we want11:22to find the matrix representation of T with respect to standard ordered basis. So, for11:28standard ordered basis T of 1 comma 0 comma 0 we already have got the image. So, we can11:32just express it in terms of standard ordered basis and we will get this half into 1 comma11:390 comma 0 plus 0 into 0 comma 1 comma 0 plus half into 0 comma 0 comma 1.11:50Similarly, for the second one, it will be just minus half in these two places and 011:58in the middle one. So, this is 0 comma 0 comma 1 and similarly for the third one again it12:12will be half into 1 comma 0 comma 0 plus 0 into 0 comma 1 comma 0 plus half into 0 comma12:220 comma 1. So, the matrix representation we got here with respect to standard ordered12:28basis will be half, 0, half, minus half, 0, minus half, half, 0, half. So, this will be12:49the matrix representation with respect to standard ordered basis of the given matrix12:53which we have started.12:55Now, for the same linear transformation which is T x, comma y, comma z is going to half13:00of x minus y plus z comma 0 comma x minus y plus z. For this linear transformation if13:07we want to visualize the kernel, so what we have to do? Basically, this image should I13:13mean, kernel will about all those vectors x comma y comma z so that the image will be13:200\. So, if the image will be 0, we get x minus y plus z equal to 0 and that will give us13:25y equal to x plus z.13:27So, all these vectors x comma y comma z such that y equal to x plus z and everything is13:38from real x, z is from real, then this vector space is our kernel of T. So, this is our13:47kernel of T. So, what will be the basis of this kernel? So, there are two independent13:56variable x and z so we can get kernel as the span of these two vectors. So, if we put x,14:06if we 1 in place of x we will get 1 comma 1 comma 0 and if we put 1 in place of z and14:170 in place of x, we will get 0 comma 1 comma 1. So, these two stand out, these two vectors14:27will be our kernel of T. So, this is our kernel of T.14:35So, you can also calculate this by using row operations on this matrix what we have got14:42here. if we can do the row operation, you will again see that the one vector will be14:48dependent variable and two are independent variables, so kernel will be of dimension14:512 and it will be scanned by these two vectors. And so now if we can go back earlier from14:59where we have started, you can see that for the first two vectors of these basis beta,15:05this 1 comma 1 comma 0 and 0 comma 1 comma 1 for these two vectors, the image is nothing15:12but 0.15:13So, that we have written here, these two vectors, for these vectors the image are going to be15:180 and for the last one the image is the same vector. So, for span of these two has vectors15:251 comma 1 comma 0 and 0 comma 1 comma 1 will form a, these two vectors will form a basis15:33of kernel of T. So, that we have seen in this example. Now let us try to visualize these15:45thing in Algebra.15:46So, now if in three dimension plane in R3 if we choose the vector minus 4 comma 6 comma15:533 which we have seeing in the figure, in the diagram, then the image of this will be this16:00new vector which we are seeing that is minus 3.5 comma 0 comma minus 3.5. So, now if we16:08change the vectors there, we will see the image will also change here.16:16Now, if we only consider the vectors of this form such that x comma y comma z such that16:25y equal to x plus z which we have seen that is the kernel of the transformation. So, how16:30the vectors will look like, so for that thing the vectors will look like this and in that16:36case if we choose all the vectors in this form as we can see, so minus 2 comma 3 comma16:465\. So, that means 5 plus minus 2 that will give us 3.16:49So, the second coordinate is basically the sum of the first coordinate and the third16:54coordinate. If we consider these vectors only, then the image will always be 0. So, if we17:00vary this, all these form of vectors, all these kind of vectors which are in this kernel,17:06we will see that the image will be nothing but 0.17:10So, all these vectors which are of this form will lie in the plane as you can see here,17:16it will lie in the plane as you can see this all these vectors are on the same plane and17:27the plane is nothing but x minus y plus z equal to 0 that is y equal to x plus z. So,17:33all these vectors will lie in the plane and the image of these vectors will be 0, so this17:39plane is basically the kernel of this linear transformation.17:42So, this is a two dimension vector space passing through origin and so this is the geometrical17:48representation of the kernel. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.