---
title: "L4.3: What is the rank/dimension for a vector space :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L4.3: What is the rank/dimension for a vector space :: IITM Online Degree

L4.3: What is the rank/dimension for a vector space

Transcript Language

English

00:04Transcriber's Name: Crescendo  Transcription Pvt. Ltd.  00:06Mathematics for Data Science - 2 Professor Sarang Sane  00:09Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras  00:12What is the rank/dimension for a vector space? Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of  00:16the online B.Sc. degree on data science. In  this video we are going to talk about what is  00:23the rank or the dimension of a vector space. So, let us recall before, we have defined what  00:28is called the basis for a vector space. What  is the basis? A basis for vector space is a  00:33linearly independent subset which spans  that vector space. What does that mean?  00:38That means, we can write every vector uniquely as  a linear combination of vectors from this set B.  00:47So, just to make that last remark clear, if V is  v1, v2, vn then for every v in V there is a unique  00:56set of scalars, again, the emphasis on unique,  a1, a2, an, so that V is summation aivi.  01:04So, spanning says that there is a set of vectors  and linear independence says that that set of  01:09vectors is, sorry, there is a set of scalars, so  that V is summation aivi and linear independence  01:15says that that set of scalars must be unique.  No other scalars will give you this vector V,  01:23only a1, a2, an, this is the only possible choice  which gives you V. That is, if set B satisfies  01:29this property, then it is called a basis. And  if it is a basis, it satisfies this property.  01:36So, what is the rank or the dimension of  a vector space? It is the size of a basis  01:41or the cardinality of a basis. So, for this  course, what that means is, it is the number of  01:48elements in a basis B. What is the difference  in these two statements; even in the previous  01:54slide I had a slight difference in how I put it  down. So, the point is in general your vectors  02:02could have an infinite number of, your basis size  could be in finite and that is why we have to talk  02:09about cardinality and size and so on. So, for the, for those who want to do more  02:16serious or rigorous mathematics, we have to  bother about such things. But for this course,  02:21we want to use all these ideas to analyze  data. And of course, we, there is no notion  02:26of an infinite amount of data. It can be very  large, still finite. So, we will be content with  02:35sizes which are finite. So, what this means  is, if B is the basis of vector space V,  02:41you just count the number of elements in B. For example, in the standard basis,  02:46if you have Rn, we have the standard basis e1,  e2, en, the number of elements in that basis is  02:53n and that is exactly the dimension  or the rank of the vector space Rn.  03:02So, first of all, we have to ask various  questions for, because we have made this  03:06definition. Does every vector space have a  basis? Indeed, that is true. Again, as I said,  03:13we will restrict ourselves to easy examples  where they are subspaces of Rn.  03:20And we, for such things, we can go about doing it  in the way we did in the previous video. Namely,  03:27we can start with the empty set and keep appending  vectors so that the set that you have at every  03:34stage remains linearly independent. And at some  stage, we will get a maximal linearly independent  03:39set and that will be your basis. So, that  happens in a finite number of steps. So,  03:44the number of steps tells you what is the number  of basis vectors. So, indeed, every vector space  03:51has a basis. And indeed, we can count it using  that method that we had in the previous video.  03:59Now, of course, you might say  that you can use that method, but  04:04we had various choices of applying  that method. We saw various different  04:10basis for a single vector space. How do we know  that the different basis have the same size,  04:18that is a fact. This is a fact  that we are not going to prove.  04:23We may indicate a proof at some point,  but we will not give a formal proof.  04:28So, the point we are trying to make here is every  vector space has a basis, every basis has the same  04:35number of elements in it and that number is called  the dimension or the rank of that vector space.  04:43So, the dimension of vector space is uniquely  defined, it is, meaning it is well defined,  04:50because every basis has the same  number of elements and basis do exist.  04:55So, it is denoted by dim of V or rank of V. So, the reason for the slight  05:03haziness in nomenclature, meaning we  have two different names, is because  05:10when you do higher algebra dimension starts  having a different meaning. But for this course,  05:16we are going to stick to dimension of V. However,  the notion of rank will come and that will come  05:22for a matrix at the end of this video. And to  reconcile these, it is a good idea to remember  05:29the dimension of is the same as rank of V. They  are the same, they have the same meaning.  05:36With that caveat, let us go ahead. So, let us  recall the standard basis vector in Rn. Ei is 0,  05:420, 0 up till the ith vector, ith  coordinate which is 1 and then  05:47again a bunch of 0s in the other coordinates. So,  the set e1, e2, en was called the standard basis  05:56and that means that the dimension of Rn is n.  06:00So, we noted this idea in some previous videos. We  said the largest, if you have n plus 1 vectors in  06:08Rn, they cannot be linearly independent. They have to be linearly dependent.  06:14So, n seemed like the optimal size. This was  what we talked about in our previous video  06:21that having linear independence and spanning means  that in some sense your, the size has to meet in  06:28some place that is exactly the dimension. So, here  the dimension is n, for Rn the dimension is n.  06:34Let us calculate the dimension of the subspace  W of R3 spanned by 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0 and 3, 5, 0.  06:44So, observe that the third vector 3, 5, 0 is  a linear combination of the first two vectors.  06:51So, this set is not linearly independent,  but we can do the following. So,  06:56this was a method that we discussed in the  previous video. If you have a spanning set,  07:01how to get a basis from that spanning set,  namely do remove or delete vectors which  07:06are linear combinations of the other vectors. So, we delete the vector 3, 5, 0 from the set, the  07:12remaining two vectors 1, 0, 0 and 0, 1, 0 do form  a linearly independent set. You can check this.  07:18It is a subset of the standard basis.  So, remember that if you have a set of  07:22vectors which are linearly independent, then  every subset is also linearly independent.  07:27Something you have either already done  in your tutorials or we will do soon.  07:34So, the set 1, 0, 0, and 0, 1, 0 we know it  is a spanning set, because we obtained it  07:42by deleting vector 3, 5, 0. I will warn you it is  a spanning set for the subspace W not for R3. We  07:49are not saying it is a spanning set for R3. We are  saying it is a spanning set for the subspace W.  07:56So, it is a, so and we know it is linearly  independent, the set 1, 0, 0 and 0, 1, 0. That  08:03means it is linearly independent plus spanning  for W. That means it forms a basis for W.  08:10And what is W? W is spanned by these three  vectors. That is what we started with.  08:14So, what we are really saying is that, well,  we have a spanning set for W. We started with  08:23these three vectors, but we actually found  that a basis for W which is 1, 0, 0 and 0, 1, 0  08:32and now we know exactly what W is that means. W is  exactly the XY plane. W is points on the XY plane.  08:42So, in particular, this also tells us  that the dimension of W is 2. Why is it 2,  08:49because the basis of W has size 2. What  is the basis, 1, 0, 0 and 0, 1, 0.  08:56So, as I noted, this is the XY plane. Let us do this same example in terms of matrices.  09:04And this is important because we are going  to use these ideas in the next video and  09:10we are going to demonstrate explicitly how  to find basis and how to find the dimension.  09:18So, write the vectors which  span W as rows of a matrix.  09:22So, in this case that matrix is going to be 1,  0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 3, 5, 0. Apply row reduction to  09:29this matrix. This is something we have studied  in the last week or maybe two weeks ago.  09:36So, if we do that, this is a very easy row  reduction. So, the, it is written here,  09:42but I will suggest you quickly check this. So, you  subtract 3 times the first row from the third row  09:48and you subtract 5 times the second row from the  third row. And what do you get is the last matrix  09:53which is in a reduced row echelon form. So, we  get the matrix 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0 and 0, 0, 0.  10:02So, this is in row echelon form,  actually reduced row echelon form.  10:07And its rows form a basis of the subspace W. So, what are the rows? The rows are 1, 0, 0 and 0,  10:131, 0, which is exactly what we saw was a basis  for W. So, in particular, what that means is, if  10:20you want to know only what is the dimension, you  do not care about what is the basis, but just the  10:24dimension, we could have read it off as the number  of non-zero rows in this last matrix 1, 0, 0,  10:320, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0. The number of non-zero rows in  this matrix is 2 and that is a dimension of W. So,  10:40this is just an example. But this is a fact that  we will use later that this always happens.  10:49Let us use this idea. I mean, so somehow this is  related to matrices. So, let us define rank of a  10:56matrix. This is one of the reasons as I mentioned  earlier that there are these two, I specifically  11:03talked about rank of V or dimension of V, which  are both the same things, but remember that both  11:09are the same because we are only going to use  that to define what is the rank of a matrix.  11:16Let A be an m by n matrix. The column space  of A is the subspace of Rm. So, remember that  11:23the columns have m components. So,  they are subspaces of, sorry, sub,  11:30they are elements of Rm, they are vectors in Rm.  So, the column space of A is a subspace of Rm  11:36generated by the column vectors of A. Generated  means spanned by the column vectors of A. So,  11:42you take all the column vectors and take span  of that set that is the column space of A.  11:50Similarly, we can talk about the  row space. This is a subspace of Rn.  11:57So, you take the rows of A and you  12:02take the span of that that is the row space. So,  the dimension of the column space of A is defined  12:08as the column rank of A. The dimension of the  row space of A is defined as the row rank of A.  12:16And here is a fact which we will  not prove very important fact.  12:20And this is at the heart of that previous fact  also that I stated, which I did not prove that  12:27two different basis have the same size. So,  the fact is that the column rank is the same  12:33as the row rank. That previous fact we can prove  directly, but this is another way of proving it.  12:40So, column rank is the same as row rank.  And we call this number as the rank of A.  12:48So, let us find the rank of A. This is  an example, not only justify why this is  12:56used, that will come later. So, what we do  is we take this matrix and we do again the  13:03same thing that we did before. You reduce it  to row echelon form. So, I am, this is rather,  13:09these are the kinds of computations we have done  before. So, I will run through this quickly.  13:14So, this is 1, 0, 0, minus 2, minus 3, 1, 3,  3, 0. So, we want to make the first column,  13:21there is a 1 already in the one 1th  position, so make everything else in the  13:25first column as 0, that means we add 2 times the  first row to the second row and we add 3 times,  13:32sorry, subtract 3 times the first  row from the third row, that gives us  13:37the matrix 1, 0, 1, 0, minus  3, 3 and 0, 3 minus 3.  13:45So, now let us get the two 2th element,  make it what we call a pivot. So,  13:53this minus 3 we want to make 1. So, we divide R2  by minus 3. So, if you do that, you get the row 0,  14:021, minus 1 in place of the, as the second row  in place of what we have as the second row.  14:07And then use the 1 in the two 2th position to  sweep out the second column below that 1.  14:15And if we do that, actually the third column  becomes 0. So, you do subtract 3 times the second  14:20row from the third row and that gives you the  final matrix 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, minus 1, 0, 0, 0. And  14:31this matrix has two non-zero rows, and therefore,  rank of this matrix is 2. So, the point here is,  14:39I mean, what did we use in order to prove this?  Remember that our definition was that the rank of  14:47the matrix A, so rank of A is the rank of  the row space of A or column space of A.  15:00But what we are saying is that if you reduce it  to, reduce row echelon form or row echelon form,  15:08so if you change A to R via row operations,  then the rank remains unaffected.  15:26So, the rank does not change under elementary  operations. This is really the main point.  15:31And hence, what I can do is I can put the matrix  into, a matrix in reduced row echelon form or  15:38row echelon form and then I can just look  at how many rows are non-zero, because here  15:44what I really have is that these  two rows 1, 0, 1 and 0, 1, minus 1,  15:52they span the row space of A. And because of the special nature  15:57of these roles that they form a matrix  which is in reduced row echelon form,  16:02they are also linearly independent, which means  it is a basis. So, that is why rank of A is 2.  16:12So, let us recall quickly what we have seen in  this video. So, in this video, we have talked  16:18about the dimension or the rank of a vector  space. So, what is the dimension of the rank of  16:23vector space it is the number of elements in the  basis. Why does this statement even make sense?  16:30It makes sense because every vector space has a  basis and all possible basis have the same size.  16:38These are statements we have to prove. They are not entirely trivial, not hard either,  16:44but they need some proof. And maybe this is not,  we would not be studying that in this course. But  16:51these are important statements. So, now that we  know what is the dimension we can go ahead and ask  16:58how do we compute it. So, one way of  computing it is to find a basis.  17:03How do we find a basis? Well, in the previous  video we have seen one method is to keep choosing  17:09linearly independent vectors, appending  linearly independent vectors to your set  17:14and, well, we have to be careful, when I  say linearly independent vectors, that means  17:18you have a set which is linearly independent and  you append a vector which maintains the linear  17:24independence of that set. And you keep doing  this until this is no longer possible.  17:29That was one way of finding a  basis. And then you ask how many,  17:33what is the size of such a basis. The other way  is to have a spanning set and go the other way,  17:38keep throwing out elements, deleting.  But right now we saw a slightly simpler  17:44method which was that if you have a spanning  set, you put that into a matrix form,  17:50you take the reduced row echelon form of that  matrix or even just the row echelon form.  17:57And then what is, whatever is the number of  non-zero rows, that is the dimension of your  18:04vector space V. Now, the idea here is sort  of dependent on matrices. So, we can talk  18:15about the rank of a matrix, which we defined as  the column, the dimension of the column space  18:24or equally as a dimension of the row space  because both of them match. That is again a  18:27theorem which we have not proved. But which I suggest you can prove  18:34by yourself, maybe a bit hard, but you can  at least check on some examples, check the  18:42row rank and the column rank  and so see that they match.  18:47And how do I get row rank or column  rank, again it is by reducing to the  18:51echelon form. In the next video, we are  going to take this up more systematically  18:58and do many more examples of computing  dimensions and basis. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.