---
title: "Introduction to course - Data, Statistics and Probability :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# Introduction to course - Data, Statistics and Probability :: IITM Online Degree

Introduction to course - Data, Statistics and Probability

Transcript Language

English

00:13Hello and welcome to this course. This is the  Statistics 2 course that we will be doing in  00:20this program. You must have already done the  Statistics I course and maybe the Mathematics  00:25I course in your previous term. In this term,  we will take that forward and step into the  00:32second part of the statistics course. This is Week 0. I mean, if we are not really  00:38starting the course. It is sort of like a prelude  to the course and we will generally look at  00:44statistics and probability and data from a  very high level and sort of set the stage  00:50for what is to come in the rest of the course.  So, that is the main goal of a few lectures we  00:56have as part of week 0 in this class. It  is an introduction to the whole course.  01:03So, a quick overview. Hopefully, you have learnt  the previous three or four courses that come in  01:11the first part of the foundational program, which  is Statistics I, where you learn to handle data,  01:20summarize in different ways,  look at some summary statistics  01:23and handle some simple probabilistic scenarios and  you were introduced to this in your first course  01:30and of course, there were other courses,  computational thinking, mathematics, English,  01:34etc. I do not want to say too much about it.  So, now, we are jumping into Statistics 2.  01:39So, this is sort of like an important course  which is going to connect a lot of things for you.  01:44In particular, we will continue our  study of data, statistics, probability,  01:49look at connections between them, how one works  with the other. And slowly, you will also handle  01:56larger amounts of data in this class case. So, you will start getting comfortable with larger  02:00amounts, maybe try to understand the difficulties  in handling large amounts of data using computer  02:07etc. And we will also consider more complex  probabilistic scenarios, slightly more advanced  02:12probability and we will study very important  classical statistical questions and procedures.  02:19The formal syllabus of the course will be made  available to you as a document, as a spreadsheet.  02:25You can look at it later on when you have time,  but roughly this is the idea of the course. One  02:34important aspect with respect to grading in this  class, is that there is the usual thing that you  02:41are, that in all courses in this program you must  be doing which is writing quizzes and exams and  02:48that will give you 100 percent of the marks. In this class, I am going to introduce  02:52some activities for you and depending on  whether you finish those activities or not,  02:58you may be eligible for a 10 percent bonus  on top of the other marks that you have. So,  03:03this activities are clearly not mandatory.  You can get 100 percent even without them.  03:09But I think these activities are very crucial. They will really help you give you a hands on  03:14feel for what the subject is and how to  work with it. So, that is the overview.  03:21Now, let us get into the details of what  are, some more intricate details about Data,  03:28Statistics, Probability and some questions  surrounding them. Once again this is just an  03:32introductory lecture. So, I will be at a very  high level to give you a broad introduction.  03:41So, let us begin in a slightly more general way,  go back to the very basics and think about how  03:48people study phenomena in science. So, science  is sort of like the starting point of many things  03:54and you are curious about some things that  you see and you are looking for explanations,  03:59you are looking for being able to use it in  applications, maybe an interesting phenomenon,  04:04whatever. So, that is how science began. And generally, the way scientific theories  04:11work or science works is usually people begin with  observations, some interesting observations, which  04:16provides in today's language, you can say data.  In those days, I do not know, they would have just  04:21said experimental observations and experiments,  etc. But let us say we call them data.  04:27For instance, you can see some couple of pictures  here which depict very famous maybe scientific  04:33observations for centuries. One picture shows an  apple falling from a tree and the other picture  04:41shows the solar system. People for centuries  have observed the solar system. Across the globe  04:47they have made noting of where different planets  are at different times and they have tried to find  04:54some patterns in this data or they actually  already found some patterns in this data.  04:58And an apple once it ripens and  cuts, gets cut off from the tree,  05:04it falls towards the ground in sort of like a  straight vertical line. It picks up speed as it  05:08comes down. All these patterns were known,  particularly with respect to the planets,  05:14lots and lots of patterns were  known. For various other reasons  05:18people knew that all this kind of phenomenon that  you observe of movement of objects, objects moving  05:24from one place to the other for various reasons,  there is a pattern that they seem to follow. So,  05:30these observations were all there. And one of the great achievements in science was  05:37these Newton's theories of motion. So, the theory  came along a little bit later and one of the  05:45great successes of this theory is that it could  with some very simple equations, consistently  05:52explain all these observed patterns across the  spectrum of movement of objects, so dynamics and  06:02mechanics of objects, this theory, simple theory,  with very simple equations and simple notions of  06:08force and mass and acceleration, one could explain  all these phenomenon in a very consistent way.  06:14All these patterns could be explained in a very  consistent way. So, that is what theory does.  06:19And once when you have a theory which can explain  all these patterns, you can put it to use and the  06:24applications are plentiful. You can see all the  applications of Newton's laws all the way around  06:29you. I do not have to say anything more. So, this  is this is how science works. This is how a proper  06:36rigorous scientific study of a phenomenon works.  So, why am I saying all this? This is just to  06:43sort of give you a feel for where we are going  in this entire program maybe or particularly  06:49in this course we will also study phenomena. Some phenomenon, which produces some patterns in  06:55the data. So, you get some data and there is some  patterns in the data and there is some phenomena  06:59we want to understand that. So, in the large  picture, we are doing the same thing as this,  07:04except that our approach and our data is  going to have different type of patterns  07:09and our methods will be different. So,  this is one way to think of how we work.  07:16So, coming to our course, in particular,  this notion of statistical study, there are,  07:22one can say two types of patterns that one can  observe in this data that you may generate from  07:30various observations or experiments or something.  One would be sort of a deterministic pattern. For  07:36instance, you could think of position of an  object, which is moving, say, at a constant  07:42velocity, then its current position is going to  be initial position plus velocity into time. So,  07:47that is like a deterministic equation. So, you  know the initial position, you know the velocity,  07:50you know at what time you want the current  position. You plug it in, you get the answer.  07:54It is a very clear deterministic pattern, which  is explained, which a very simple equation.  07:59Now, many scientific theories out there  similarly used deterministic equations, maybe not  08:06such simple equations. You already know from  your maybe some physics you have studied  08:11that if the object is not just moving at  constant speed, but it is accelerating  08:16then you have more terms. And in fact, if it is  doing various other things, you have more terms.  08:21And as you look at more and more  complex scientific theories,  08:24more and more difficult mathematics comes in. You will have differential equations, difference,  08:30partial differential equations, integration,  all of that will come in. But all of that is  08:34not relevant for us at all. But I am just  pointing out that the mathematics can get a  08:39bit more complicated even when the pattern is very  deterministic. You know what the pattern is you to  08:45describe it you need more complex mathematics. I can give you a lot of examples. Maybe a simple  08:50example is sound, the sound, the way sound travels  from one point to the other. Usually, in physics,  08:57people use something called wave theory for it.  And then wave, the patterns that wave produces  09:02in air is described using more complicated  equations than this kind of equation. But still  09:07the philosophy is always the same. You observe  something. You see a pattern in a phenomenon and  09:12you want to explain it with the consistent  theory. Consistency is very important.  09:17So, in some way the theory has to work  repeatedly in different scenarios,  09:22only then it is meaningful. If it is  going to work only in isolated cases,  09:27I mean, people still believe in such things,  but you need belief, you need faith, it is not a  09:31proper scientific theory in some sense. So, here,  we are interested in such scientific theories.  09:37Now, let us look at situations where it seems  like there is a pattern, but the scenario is very  09:43complex and you cannot write simple equations  for it. So, I have put together here like four  09:48examples for you or maybe these examples are not  that relevant, but still you can see that the  09:53complexity can quickly go up even when no simple  things are involved and suddenly the situation  10:00becomes complex. So, let me start with the  first example here which is tossing a coin.  10:06You have seen people toss a coin and they expect  the outcome to be sort of random. You cannot  10:11predict ahead of time, whether it is going to  be head or tails. But why is that? When someone  10:17tosses the coin, the coin sort of takes off from  their finger, it keeps flipping depending on  10:24how fast that initial tip was, the initial push  from the finger, flick from the finger was.  10:31It keeps twisting and turning, twisting  and turning and it is going to fall down,  10:34it is going to fall at some angle and depending  on where it falls and being on the ground it may  10:39roll, it may do a tumble or it may just fall flat,  there is just so much going on and there may be a  10:45breeze in the air and that may affect it. There  may be some particles in the air. Who knows.  10:52So, even though the equations of motion for the  coin is well understood by the time you apply  11:00it with all the unknowns and equations, you will  not go anywhere. By the time the coin would have  11:06fallen and somebody would have known whether it  is head or tails, you do not need to write your  11:09equations anymore. So, when the situation is  even mildly complex, it looks like we cannot  11:17write simple equations and know for sure what  will happen. So, that is a simple example with  11:23a coin toss. You can push this a little bit. The next example I have put there is a pair of  11:27dice. So, you throw a pair of dice, some numbers  show up. Now, you might say, of course, the motion  11:33of the dice and all is well understood. Once you  know the position, you can calculate where it is  11:38rotating, etc., etc. But by the time you finish  all that, the dice would have already landed and  11:43you would already know what the numbers is. There is no need to do all that. So, you can  11:48quickly see how even a mildly interesting  phenomenon can become impossibly complex to  11:55write equations for and write precise, how precise  deterministic theories explaining what will happen  12:01and let us look at more complicated phenomena  which are very, very important in practice.  12:06So, for instance, the third picture here  shows the annual rainfall map of India.  12:12Now, being able to know how much rain is going  to happen in what states is a huge plus. So,  12:20you can decide what to plant everywhere  and it changes the economy fundamentally.  12:26Can you understand how rainfall is going to work?  Can you be very precise about it? Can you say this  12:30is the amount of rainfall this part  will get? Largely no, is not it.  12:35So, but still you see some predictions coming out.  It seems like they are all not deterministic. You  12:39cannot be sure, yes this is exactly what is going  to happen. It is not something you can say. So,  12:44you can only say, maybe this will happen, this  can also happen, this is most likely to happen,  12:49this is the chance that this will happen.  You will hear words like this being uttered  12:54when talking about rainfall. Let us take a more interesting and maybe  12:59more lucrative area into consideration, which is  the last picture here. I do not know how many of  13:04you recognize that picture. That is a picture of  the stock exchange and Dalal Street in Bombay,  13:09the Bombay Stock Exchange, which deals with stocks  and trades and things like that and so many other  13:15complicated things, which I do not understand.  But there is a value for every stock.  13:20And depending on after you buy whether the  value goes up or not, you can make or lose  13:25a lot of money. In fact, today s stock markets are  so complex that even if the stock value goes down,  13:30you can ended up, end up making money apparently.  So, there is all sorts of complicated products  13:35out there. Let us not go into it. This is  not a course about the stock market.  13:38But notice, if you want to predict the value of a  stock, once again, the situation is quite complex.  13:47So, many people can trade on that stock from  different places in the world, across the globe,  13:52and even on the ground on the BSE. So, so much  trade can happen and all of that determines the  13:59stock price, not just that news about something  or whether there is a financial crisis or whether  14:04there is a storm somewhere, etc., etc.  all of that affects the stock market.  14:08So, maybe you cannot have a deterministic  answer to what is going to happen to a stock,  14:13but even a prediction on what is most likely to  happen, what is the chance of something to happen  14:19can help you make decisions on whether or not you  want to buy stock and that can make or break your  14:26bank account, etc., etc. So, it is very lucrative  and it is a very important phenomenon to study.  14:32So, here are four different phenomenon  I pointed out. A couple of them seemed  14:36like sort of toy examples, tossing a coin,  throwing a dice, seems like toy examples.  14:41But couple of other examples are very important  in practice and these are all very complex and  14:46it is not going to be worth your while to make  deterministic predictions of theories on it.  14:51But can you make any prediction at all. Can you  say something with some chance and can you put  14:56it to use and can you benefit from it? So, these  are the kind of questions that naturally occur.  15:02And in, so generally now how do you start looking  for patterns when the situation is so complex like  15:10this. How do you start explaining these patterns?  Are there, is there a theoretical framework?  15:15Newton's mechanics give you a theoretical  framework for studying this phenomenon. Is  15:20there a theoretical framework for situations like  this for random like phenomena, where it looks  15:25like there is nothing deterministic that one can  say about the phenomenon? Is there a theory? Is  15:30there application? Can you make use of it? Can you  answer some questions based on these things? So,  15:36all of these things are natural questions. And believe it or not, in this particular course,  15:41we are going to make progress towards  understanding these things. I mean,  15:44you are not going to be able to predict stock  market values based on this course, but at  15:49least we will take a step towards that. So, you  will go towards understanding random phenomenon.  15:55How to think of them theoretically? How to use  them in applications? How to make predictions  16:00based on them? And how it is useful? So, that is  sort of the big picture of where this course is  16:07and that involves data, statistics,  probability all three are involved in that  16:14in this kind of analysis. So, in particular, we will be doing  16:18what is called statistical study of what looks  like patterns in random like phenomenon. So, I  16:28was talking about this even in the previous slide.  So, let me not spend too much time on this one.  16:34When a phenomenon is very complex, it looks  like we cannot have exact simple models.  16:38I gave you examples of how all these  three particular situations work out.  16:43But still there is a pattern. So, there is a pattern, is not it? So,  16:47you can see if you have a coin which you believe  is fair, if you keep tossing it for a long time,  16:52if you repeatedly do it, you expect half the time  it to be heads, half the time it to be tails. So,  16:56that is a pattern. So, maybe there is a theory  which can sort of predict that happening.  17:02So, similarly, for rainfall, you see people  will make a statement like, for instance,  17:06the meteorology department will make a statement  saying there is a 70 percent chance of rain  17:10tomorrow. First of all, what do they mean  by that? What is the 70 percent chance? How  17:13do you interpret it? You take an umbrella with  you if they say 70 percent chance. So, likewise,  17:19even for monsoon, they make predictions. It  is going to be average monsoon, below average,  17:23above average, they make these makes predictions.  I mean, what is the meaning of these predictions?  17:26Where did they come from? How, is there a theory  behind this or is it somebody just guessing?  17:33What is going on here? So, similarly, with the stock market, even  17:36though it looks to you like it is very random,  the trading companies hire a lot of statisticians  17:43and professionals who can track trends in the  stock market and they use a lot of statistical  17:50study and analysis for it. So, it looks like,  even though the phenomenon looks very complex and  17:55very random like, there are some hidden patterns  and nice structures and is there a theoretical,  18:02what is the theoretical framework for  studying this? How do you apply these things  18:06using the theory is something very interesting  and that is what we will do in this class.  18:10So, specifically, we will do  what is called statistical study.  18:13You already seen statistics before. It is not  new to you. But we will take it a little bit more  18:17forward and study slightly more complicated  scenarios. So, if you want to put it in  18:25very mild terms, basically you collect, observed  data and then you use probabilistic analysis,  18:31use probability as a tool to make inferences  about the data, to make predictions about the data  18:36to learn more from the data that you have. So, this is the nature of statistical study  18:42and one can even say, I mean, it is had a huge  influence in the modern world. So, you can sort of  18:48say it is 120, last 100 and 120 years, statistics  has become really, really taken a stranglehold  18:56on so many different diverse areas that people  use statistical ideas everywhere and in today's  19:04machine learning, data-driven world it is  become very, very important to understand  19:08the fundamentals of statistics,  probability, data and what is the interplay  19:13between the three of them. So, this course hopefully will  19:16illuminate some of the interplay and  get you practice with understanding  19:21what data is, what is the pattern, where is the  probability theory that talks about it, and where  19:25is the statistics that is going to come in. So, here is a picture that I have just drawn these  19:31three things together and it is a good picture to  sort of keep in your mind. I think other people  19:36might draw other pictures differently. The same  picture sort of differently. But this, I think,  19:41is hopefully useful to you as you go along in  this course or maybe even in this entire program  19:47to understand what all this is about. So,  in statistical studies, we are looking at  19:52data that comes from the real world from some  phenomenon or any problem that you might attack  19:58and you want to see if there are patterns. So, how do you do it? You use statistics and  20:03probability. So, probability is like the theory  and you can think of statistics sort of like the  20:08application as to how you derive useful things  from the data using probabilistic analysis and  20:13probabilistic models. You make inferences.  Statistics gives you the tools and methods  20:18and ways of answering questions about the data  and making predictions about the data using these  20:24methods. So, this picture is a nice picture.  I will try to repeatedly use this picture  20:30in this class, so that you get an idea of how  these things work. And in many of the examples  20:36that we study we will have this going. So, even though, we will study each of these  20:40things separately, we will study the probability  part separately, we study the statistics part  20:44separately, we will have some running examples  that run through and connect all three of them  20:49together for us. So, this is probably a good way  to capture what the ambition or the aim of these  20:58courses and we will see as you go along how  much of this gets through correctly to you.  21:06So, that is the introduction for the course.  21:09I mentioned before that there is this activities  in this course which will give you 10 bonus  21:15points. So, I put here. This will involve several  activities. This will account for 10 percent of  21:20your marks. Account, meaning it is, it will give  you a bonus of 10 percent for the marks. So, this  21:25account does not entirely the correct usage. It will give you 10 percent bonus marks and I  21:31will assign activities for you every week, maybe  one or two or maybe some weeks no activities. I  21:37will assign some activities for you. Depending on  what fraction of those activities you complete,  21:43you will get some marks. You can get  7.5, you can get 5, 2.5 or 0 marks  21:49depending on how many activities you complete. And there is also a bonus that I might give. If  21:53you do some of the activities exceedingly  well, you may get a bonus and but overall,  21:58it is just 10 percent. And like I said, it is  a bonus on top of what you already have. So,  22:02if you do not want to do it, you do not need to  do it. But I would strongly advise that you do  22:06these activities, because it can go a long way in  helping you understand and clearly grasp ideas in  22:13this subject. So, these are the activities. So, let us begin with Week 0s activity. Already  22:18Week 0 has an activity. There are more activities  coming in Week 0 itself, but this is activity one  22:25in Week 0 and in this you will create  a Google sites page for yourself. So,  22:34it is a simple menu driven activity that you need  to do. So, let me show you how this is done. So,  22:42you have to, so I put down the list of things to  do on this, in the slide. But let me also show you  22:50ready made by hand how do I do this? I go to this site called sites.google.com.  22:59I am logged in with my online degree ID,  which you should also do. You can see,  23:05you will probably have your roll  number@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in,  23:09please log in with an ID and then you have to  create a new site and you have to use there  23:16is a template gallery, which has templates for  several different sites you can create in Google  23:21sites. I want you to pick the student portfolio.  So, you notice the student portfolio, there is  23:28a template called students portfolio. You click  on that will create a new Google Sites for you,  23:38which is according to the students portfolio. You can change a lot of things like, for instance,  23:43you can change the image. I am not going to  change the image, but you can change the image.  23:49When you reset some header type, you can change a  lot of things. You can add, apparently you can add  23:54a logo here, you can add some site bar. You can  do a lot of things here. So, this Google Sites  24:00is a very simple way to create a webpage. So, I  will tell you how this web page gets published.  24:08Right now you are just creating. You  can publish this webpage also.  24:12But maybe you want to put your name here. You can  put your name here. So, maybe I will put a name.  24:22So, it is my learning journey it says.  You can scroll down. You can write  24:27about me. So, once you have created the site,  you will get a URL, which you can potentially  24:33give to others. But I will tell you about what you  want to do with that, but this is what it is. So,  24:38you can put more things here. You can edit it. You  can see, you can keep editing whatever you want.  24:45You keep editing and editing and editing.  You can do, you can put a lot of things.  24:49I mean, so many, every one of these things is  editable. You can add some strengths, if you  24:54like some goals, just depends on what you want to  put out there. You can also add other things. You  24:58can create more things. So, you can do a lot  of things. Google Sites is quite powerful. But  25:05this is not a course on Google Sites. It is  on statistics. So, what I want you to do,  25:09if you go to pages here, you will see  there are something called classes.  25:15So, you can see, I can rename this  math to, let us say, Statistics 2  25:31and this is part of your template, the  student portfolio template. As a student,  25:35you are expected to take classes. So, you take  classes and you click on Statistics 2, it takes  25:42you to the Statistics 2 page. So, now, this is not  math anymore. So, you can make it Statistics 2.  25:51You can write a summary of what you are  learning in this class, data, statistics  26:00and probability. That is probably a good  way to summarize what this class is. You  26:04can write whatever else you want and then  you can keep making, you can keep adding  26:11things one after the other, more and more topics.  Whatever you learn, you can add here. This is your  26:16email, your website controlled by you, with  your email address. So, you can keep adding  26:21more and more that you want. You can go back to the homepage.  26:24It comes out here. You can see the sidebar is  here, say Statistics 2, all of that comes. So,  26:32you can see all this. So, now, we are ready  to publish. So, let us say we publish this  26:37site that we have created. So, you click  on publish, you will get a link here. So,  26:42it asks you for your publish your site. So,  this is the kind of URL that you will get  26:48https://sites.google.com/onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in/  you can put your name. So, let us say,  26:56what name do we want, let us put Andrew. So,  that is the name and it is okay with that.  27:03So, who can view my site, anyone at IIT Madras.  Now, I am going to ask that you do not change it.  27:12If you click on manage, you can possibly make  it public or something. I want you not to do it.  27:18This is going to be your internal site. Maybe  later on, you can think of having a public version  27:23of it. But as far as this course is concerned, you  should not be making it public. So, this should be  27:29a site that we maintain. So, if you  want to do that, you can say here,  27:36Andrew, as a student or something. It is okay.  You can just leave it like that, it is okay.  27:40So, you can give another name for  it if you want. So, you can say,  27:49Andrew learn or something like that. So, that  if you want to create your own site, it does  27:55not clash with the name. So, you can you can do  it like this. So, let us say we publish this.  28:04So, it is publishing. Once it is published, you  will see this little arrow that is shown up here.  28:11You can view the published site. You can  also unpublish. You can stop it if you  28:16like. You can view the published site, which I  recommend that you do. So, you can see it has  28:23come here. It has come to the Statistics 2. You can go to the home. So, this is your sites.  28:28So, this sites.google.com/onlinedegree/Andrew  learn you click on it, you will get access  28:35to this. Of course, only people with  online degree logins can see this site,  28:40which is what I want you to keep it as. Do not  publish it to the whole world. So, it says Andrew  28:44s learning journey. It is a website. You can,  whatever you put here will show up here. In  28:49particular, you go to classes and statistics  2, you see what you have in statistics 2.  28:55So, now everything we do, all the activities we  do in this class, you will keep adding here. Not,  29:01I mean, this is the published version. This is  your editing version. So, you can keep adding,  29:05like for instance, instead of geometry,  let us say I want to change it to Week 0,  29:15create my student portfolio site. I have done  that. So, now you have to publish again. You  29:27can review changes and publish if you want.  It will show you what has been changed.  29:34So, you can just say publish. Now, if you go to this page and you refresh,  29:44well, eventually you will get it. It takes a  little bit of time to propagate sometimes from one  29:51part to the other. It is come. So, you see Week  0, creat my student portfolio site. So, as we keep  30:00progressing in week 1, week 2, even in week 0,  you may have one more activity to do. You can keep  30:05adding them here in the topics. You can add week  0, maybe you want to make this week 0 activity 1.  30:15So, that it is clear what it is  and then you can publish also.  30:26So, it will get published eventually. You will  see here week 0 activity 1 and as and when you  30:30get more and more activity, you can add that here  very easily. So, this is one place where all the  30:35activities that you do as part of this course are  captured. So, hopefully this is interesting to  30:42you. Like I said, it is optional in this class.  You do not need to do it if you do not like it.  30:48But I hope you enjoy it. It is a site that you  can create and you can do other sites as well.  30:53Once you create one site, you can create other  sites on sites.google.com. It is very easy way  30:58to create a webpage for yourself in some way. So, that is the end of the first part of the Week  31:040 lecture. I will come back in the next  lecture and talk to you about a dataset  31:09that we are going to use in this class as  a running example. Thank you very much.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.