---
title: "Summarising powerplay overs data :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# Summarising powerplay overs data :: IITM Online Degree

Summarising powerplay overs data

Transcript Language

English

00:13So, in this course, in particular, see remember  the IPL match will generate a lot of data. And  00:19already I have told you, there are 816  matches. So, that is into 2 maybe 1600-odd,  00:26because some of them will get rained out  and all that, second innings may not happen.  00:29So, you will have 1600 innings data and each  innings has 20 overs, at least 120 deliveries,  00:36in fact, usually 125, 126 deliveries. And then  so many runs scored, so many different type of  00:44batsmen. So, you have to really make a choice  as to what you will, what you are interested  00:48in and then focus on that and study that. You can be interested in so many things. But  00:53in this course, I thought what is interesting  to study is the powerplay overs. So, I wanted  00:58some amount of data which is voluminous  enough, big enough that you cannot quickly make  01:04all the patterns that you can study.  You cannot quickly finish it off.  01:07At the same time, you can never quite accurately  fully model. It should be complex enough that  01:12it is going to be a random every time something  happens. So, I wanted something rich enough,  01:17and at the same time, not so voluminous  that everybody is thrown off by it. So,  01:22this seemed like a good choice to  make, the IPL powerplay overs.  01:26So, what is the powerplay? The powerplay in IPL  is the first six overs and there is a restriction,  01:31why it called a powerplay. There can be only two  fields outside the inner circle on the boundaries.  01:36So, a lot of runs get scored in the powerplay.  So, it is an interesting time. And it is also  01:40a predictable time. So, there is no wickets  when they start off. All teams are sort of  01:44starting with the same sort of roughly same  initial condition. Of course, they may lose  01:48wickets as they go along, but roughly same initial  conditions. The first six overs I thought were a  01:54nice thing for us to expect some patterns.  So, maybe there are some patterns there.  02:00So, once you know what is the focus area  of your problem that you are interested in,  02:05you can go ahead and collect the data. So, you run  a Python script which will collect the data from  02:10the first six overs of the powerplay period in IPL  innings, in every IPL innings, the first innings,  02:16second innings. And then start, before you even  do any serious answering of questions on building  02:23of models, you have to sort of play around with  the data. See if you can put it in a spreadsheet,  02:27calculate some numbers, draw some pictures, see  if you can do something. And just get comfortable  02:33with what kind of things you are seeing. So, that is something which is usually the  02:37second step. So, we may not do too  much of all that in this course.  02:41You may do it in your later courses. But let  us see how it is done. This is just the first  02:47practice, the 0th week of the course.  So, we can do whatever we want. So,  02:50let us just look at how this data works out. So, this is a sample from the data. Like I said,  02:56I have played, I mean, I have written a script,  which takes the data from the YAML files and puts  03:03it into a spreadsheet. This is a Google Sheet. I  will share the link of this sheet with you. So,  03:08you do not have to do the Python script work  and all that. The entire spreadsheet itself  03:12will be given to you. Here is a sample of  this. And let me click on this spreadsheet.  03:17This will take me to the actual sheet.  This is, let me open it with Google Sheets.  03:29See, there you go. So, that is the data. And this  is the sheet that I have shared with. So, if you  03:36see, shared with, it is shared with IIT Madras. So, anyone in this group can click on this link  03:43to view. So, this link will be given to you.  So, the sheet s link will be given to you. So,  03:47you can just click. As long as you are  logged in with your online degree ID,  03:51you can click on this link and this sheet  will be accessible to you. I mean, you could,  03:58I do not know if I want to say that you should  not share it with anybody else, but, you could  04:02share it to the others too if you think other  people are interested in in this, but this is  04:07just a sheet. It is information that I took from  elsewhere. So it is okay for you to keep it.  04:14So, this is, you will have viewing permission. I  do not think you will have writing permission. So,  04:20this sheet is what we have. So, let us just  look at this data. So, just to get ourselves  04:26familiar with what kind of data we are looking  at. So, you can see the data I have pulled,  04:31you have to pull this data from the YAML file.  What I have pulled is the date of the match,  04:35I have pulled the venue of the match. So, those of you who know cricket,  04:41Chinnaswamy Stadium is in Bangalore. It is a  very small ground. So, lots of runs typically get  04:46scored there. The Mohali Stadium is also a good  batting pitch etc., etc., Wankhede for instance,  04:53or Eden Gardens is bit more supportive to the  bowlers and you know things like that. So, the  04:57venue is quite important in a cricket match. So, the innings first and second innings,  05:03you will go first inning, second innings, first  innings, second innings. For the first innings,  05:08there is no target set. For the second innings  there is a target. So, for some reason I wanted  05:12to put the target in there, because the target  can influence how runs are scored in the powerplay  05:18period. So, you may have teams try to chase down  a large target, make use of the powerplay. So,  05:23maybe there is some correlation here. We will see.  Those are patterns you can think of later. But  05:27this is this interesting data to keep in mind. And then, of course, the team that did the batting  05:32and then what, how many runs were scored in each  ball. So, I have not included extras or all those  05:39information. I simply take the total runs that  were scored in each delivery. Now, normally, every  05:46over should have six deliveries. But of course,  if there was an extra, there would be a seventh  05:49delivery, eighth delivery, etc. As it turns out in  the matches I have considered in IPL, the maximum  05:54number of deliveries in a single row was 10.  But I just kept it up to 12 just for a gap.  06:00So, you see the 11th and 12th delivery never  came up in an over. But up to 9 or 10 you will  06:06see some overs go. So, maybe it is surprising  or not surprising to see that in the first over  06:13quite a few first overs seem to have  seven deliveries. So it is not surprising.  06:17If you think of how the first over goes,  the bowler himself is loosening up, etc.  06:24So, it is very likely that there is at least  a wide somewhere it would come from. So,  06:28that is the first over. So, in my spreadsheet now  hopefully you get a feel for how my spreadsheet  06:34is going to go. Every row corresponds  to an innings from an IPL match. Every  06:39column is different things. So, you saw venue,  innings, target, team and then what happened,  06:45how many runs were scored in each ball. And then at the end of the first over,  06:49I have put here three summary information,  one is d1. d1 is how many deliveries  06:56were there in the first over. So, you see  seven deliveries, because there was one wide  07:01or disallowed delivery. And then how many runs  were scored in the first over that is this r1.  07:07Is that okay? Hopefully you see that. So, there  are 3 runs that were scored in the first over.  07:11And how many wickets fell in the first over.  So, I have collected this d1, r1 and w1 which is  07:18how many deliveries were there in the first over,  how many runs were scored in the first over,  07:24total runs, and how many wickets fell in the  first over. So, this is what I have done.  07:28Now, I will repeat this for every  other over in that innings. I mean,  07:32as an every over in the powerplay part of that  innings. So, you can see in the second over here,  07:37it is being a lot of scoring, so 4, 4, 6, 4, 0.  I think this is the very first IPL match back all  07:44the way in 2008 between Bangalore and Kolkata, if  I am not wrong. I think this was Brendon McCullum  07:49hitting all those fours and sixes. So, that is what happened in the second  07:56over. And in the second over, you  can see the six deliveries, 18 runs,  08:01and no wickets. So like that for every other match  you will have this information. So, this will go  08:06all the way up to third over, fourth over, fifth  over, sixth over. So, the sixth over it stops,  08:12because I am not interested in anything  beyond the powerplay. So, this is how,  08:18this is what I am, I have looked. Is that okay? Hopefully, this gives you a sense of what this  08:26data is and I mean, at this point maybe you are  little worried about how the spreadsheet came from  08:37all those files and whether you will be able to  do that, etc. It turns out Python is a wonderful  08:42language. It has so many powerful modules. And you  do not have to write really long program to do it.  08:46The script that I wrote hardly had some 10 or 15  lines. So, that is it. Just with 10 or 15 lines  08:52of code and running it, it takes some time to  run. Once it runs, you get a sheet like this. So,  08:58it is not too difficult to do something  like this. So, that is the spreadsheet.  09:05Now, once you have a spreadsheet like this, I do  not know if how much you have pulled around with  09:10spreadsheets and getting, making, calculating  descriptive statistics with spreadsheet,  09:15particularly Google Sheet is quite easy to use,  because of this explorer option. I like this a  09:21lot. You do not have to type out, know the  formulae for something ahead of time, etc.,  09:28etc. So, you can ask a lot of questions to  it, and reasonably phrased questions and  09:35it will come up with something of its own. So, for instance, I might want to know average  09:45of r1. So, r1, if you remember,  it is the number of runs scored in  09:54the first over, it is a 6. So, across all these  matches that were there, by the way, there were,  10:01I think about 1600 innings data is there in  this file. So, it is quite a big spreadsheet  10:08in some sense. So, you may want to see like,  for instance, maybe average of r1 by team.  10:20So, you see here, it shows a little pivot table  with by team, how many, what is the average of  10:27r1. Chennai Super Kings, they are always slow  starters. So, you see 5 runs per over. And then  10:32you see, I do not know how many of you remember  the Kochi Tuskers. They played in one year.  10:36Gujarat Lions, maybe that is not so interesting.  So, anyway, so you can do things like this. So,  10:43you can do comparisons. You can very easily  do so many other things you can ask here.  10:51So, I do not know if you are comfortable  with, how comfortable you are with  10:58histograms. You can do histograms here. If you  do a histogram of r6, it will show a picture  11:03like this of how many, in how many innings  you had this kind of range of runs. So,  11:11the runs are only integers. So, if it says  15.26 to 16.15, the 16 runs have scored.  11:18The highest runs you can see it somewhere here one  match or so is, there were three matches in which  11:2425 runs have scored in the first over. And you  can see this is the distribution. It, in very few  11:31matches in which like 0 runs were scored and then  the maximum number of matches is like around 6  11:38runs is where you have a lot of matches and  then it tapers down a bit more slowly than it  11:45rose up. It rose up quite fast and then it has a  longer tail. So, that is the sort of distribution  11:51that it has. You can do so many other things. You can do, like for instance, I just show you  11:58a scatter plot of r1 versus r2, you can try  this. This will plot r1 versus r2. So, you  12:10can see how that looked for a particular r1. So,  supposing 10 runs were scored in the first over,  12:17how many runs were scored in the  second over. So, things like that.  12:21Do you expect a pattern here? I do not  know. You can see these kinds of things.  12:26Maybe you want to see something  like this scatter plot of  12:31r6 versus w5, like, this might be interesting.  How many runs were scored in the sixth over  12:41versus how many wickets fell in the fifth  over? So, let us see that. Does that  12:47going to produce some pattern here? You can see  the pattern. So, if 0 wickets fell in the fifth  12:54over, you can see this, the number of runs scored  in the sixth over goes all the way up to 21.  12:59One wicket, this except for this exceptional case,  it is really reduced. And if two wickets fell in  13:06the fifth over, it really, really reduces. The  maximum is just 16 and then it has gone down. So,  13:13you should do things like this. And I would  strongly suggest it, even for moderately big  13:19sized data like this, you should pull it up  into a spreadsheet and explore these kinds  13:24of questions. And Google spreadsheet, all of you  have access to your G Suite account, you can open  13:30Google spreadsheets and ask all these questions.  There are so many more things you can do.  13:34I am just showing you some of them. So, let me go back to this slides.  13:40And then show you some of the things that I fold  around with in that explore box there. And then  13:47I picked up some numbers. Maybe we will just  go through these numbers and see are there any  13:53interesting patterns or interesting phenomenon  that we may want to explain with a model or  13:58try and do something with this data. So,  that is it. So, let us get started there.  14:03First thing I did was; I did average runs by over.  So, I said what is the average runs in the first  14:08over, second over etc. And you observe this very  interesting pattern 6, 7, and 8. So, by the third  14:15or the fourth over, it is really stabilized.  In the fourth and fifth and sixth over and it  14:20is steadily increasing, diminishing returns,  about 8.3 is the average runs by over. So,  14:27it is quite expected. People start slow and then  pick up and then accelerate as they go along.  14:33And standard deviation of runs by over, you want  to look at how the spread is. It is not too bad.  14:38It is spread also seems to have stabilized  to around 4, 4.5 etc. and you might have  14:44studied in Stats I what these numbers mean, what  average means, what standard deviation means etc.  14:50So, another interesting thing is average runs  in over six. Over six is sort of like the  14:59best over in the powerplay as at  least as indicated by the average.  15:04So, maybe you want to look at average runs in  over six by the team. And then we can conclude  15:10which are the better teams, which are the not so  good teams, or all the teams roughly okay or is  15:15there some teams just so terrible, etc. And then  there are interesting stories that come out.  15:20So, you, many of you know that the Delhi  Daredevils became the Delhi Capitals.  15:26I do not know a couple of years ago. And  look at the story there. The Delhi Daredevils  15:32had an average of 7.48 runs in the sixth over  and the Delhi Capitals have 8.94. So, look at the  15:39big leaps or something happened between the  Delhi Daredevils and Delhi Capitals. You can  15:43imagine what would have happened. And then you can see the good teams  15:47Sunrisers, CSK, they are the top of  the average and the poorer teams,  15:52slightly lower, but you can see the spread  is not so wide. It is between 7.8 and 8.9,  15:57so 7.4 and 8.9. So, teams are okay, balanced  in some sense, but there is the difference  16:04and the difference comes out in small terms. And so you have to pay attention to small changes  16:09in the statistics and that can make a difference.  So it is important, because these are all roughly  16:15equal teams. So, you have to look for what is it  that can distinguish in a small way and maybe the  16:21better teams score more once in the sixth over on  average. So, that is something we can look at.  16:28What about wickets in over five? I was just  showing you the, in quite a few innings  16:32there were no wickets and several of them one  wicket and 30 innings there were two wickets.  16:39And I also I think I showed you this the runs in  over six by wickets in over five average runs,  16:45you can see that there is a big drop from 8.77  when no wickets fell in over five and 6.7 when  16:54one wicket fell, and two wickets, we do not  really have too much data, so just 30 innings  17:01it is not enough to make any meaningful inference  from that. Anyway, we will see all this later on.  17:05But that average ends up being 7.6. So, just an example, I mean, this is the IPL  17:13powerplay data. So, we did some things that are  relevant. And any other data you want to handle,  17:18you should do something like this. So, look at  part of the data. If you cannot look at all of  17:22them, look at part of them. And then ask these  kinds of interesting simple descriptive questions  17:28and try and see if there is something here which  is interesting. This is always something that you  17:34have to learn and it is not too hard to do. So,  you can do it using the, this little explorer tab  17:40and at least see some basics in it. So, we have seen that for the IPL data  17:45and what are we going to do with this IPL  data. So, we will, in the, as you know,  17:50in the first part of the Week 0 lecture, I  told you what we will study in this course,  17:54we will basically study probability and statistics  that will be the main thing that we study.  17:58But I will keep this IPL powerplay data as sort of  a running example to do illustrations and show you  18:04how one may use the theory we learn in  probability and statistics to the IPL  18:11data and see what happens when we do that.  We would not do any sophisticated thing,  18:15but just simple minded things and ask whether  there are reasonable probabilistic models  18:22for the IPL data, whether inferences that we draw  from them, are there, are they reasonable in some  18:28ways, is it useful in some way, etc., etc. So,  that is something that we will try to do.  18:34So, like I said, when we study probability, when  we study statistics, we will use the powerplay  18:41data and come up with ways of applying the, what  we study to that data and see what happens. So,  18:50it is something interesting that we will try.  So, let me leave it at this. It is probably a  18:57little bit vague right now. So, maybe when I give  you some examples, you will see how interesting,  19:03how, whether it is interesting or  not. You can conclude for yourself.  19:08So, let me end the second lecture of Week 0 with  another activity. So, you saw one example of how  19:15I was able to get some data, do some small work  with it and then get it into a spreadsheet and  19:22then do some descriptive statistics on that and  say something meaningful about the patterns in  19:28the data. I want you to do in Activity 2  something similar with any other data.  19:37Do not pull cricket data. I know there is, do not  just take data from another cricket tournament  19:42and do the same thing. Maybe other data, there  is lots of other data sources. So, this will  19:48also give you a way of running around and looking  for sources. Do not go to, try to avoid, I mean,  19:54I will only say try to avoid, because you may  not be able to avoid, try to avoid these sites  19:59like Kaggle and all these, which already give you  curated data, so that data that they have picked  20:05up and put into a good format for you to use. I want you to have the experience of looking for  20:10some data and then seeing whatever format it may  be and then putting it into a spreadsheet in some  20:16ways, is that meaningful. So, I do not want you  to pick up like thousands of rows and hundreds of  20:21columns, just at least, but do something slightly  non-trivial. Go for 100 rows and 5 columns at  20:27least. So, around that ballpark number see if you  can identify a situation. It could be something  20:34as simple as your neighborhood grocery store. So, you have a grocery store and you are friends  20:40with the store owner and maybe you want him to  give you some data about how many people buy what  20:46product or something like that, what is the cost  of the product, its inventory, who knows. It could  20:51be something as simple as that. So, it need not  even be anything very grand or big or you do not  20:57have to search in the Internet for it. You can go  out and pick up something and see if there is any  21:03pattern or some interesting thing in the data that  you observe. So, this is again an activity.  21:09It is a graded activity, like I said, it is  graded for the bonus marks that you may get  21:14and there will be a subjective activity assignment  based on this. And you love to put it up in the,  21:20in your portfolio webpage. So, you, whatever  data you collect into a Google Sheet, you put  21:25a link in that, you remember the Statistics 2  page that we did for the portfolio, below that  21:30there will be a section, in that section, you put  a link and then describe what data you got. So,  21:35you can add text also. So, you describe in that  text what is the data you got and how you got.  21:41Once again, this is bonus. If you do not  want the bonus, you do not have to do it.  21:44But I hope you do it, because this  is something that will be very, very  21:48useful for you. Thank you very much. With that, we  conclude Week 0 of this course. And I look forward  21:56to taking you on this interesting journey through  the rest of the weeks. Thank you very much.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.