---
title: "L1.2: Matrices :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L1.2: Matrices :: IITM Online Degree

L1.2: Matrices

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the maths 2 component of the online BSC course on Data Science.00:20In today s video, in this video we want to talk about matrices and as you can see up00:27here. Now matrices, you may heard of matrices in a completely different context, namely00:33there is this movie called the matrix and its sequence which you may have seen in one00:39of these movie channels.00:41So, that has a much more difficult and intricate plot line and the use of the matrix there00:50is much much much more inworld. We will see that in actuality the matrices that we need,00:55matrices is plural form matrix are much easier and how they deal with vectors and in linear01:05algebra which we are studying now.01:08So, today s in this video we are going to study what is a matrix, we will study some01:15related terms, we study diagonal and scalar matrices, we look at the identity matrix,01:22we will talk about linear equations and matrices. So, this is the relationship with linear equations.01:27This is really one of the main reason why we study matrices.01:31We look at the algebra of matrices. So, things like the addition of matrices, scalar multiplication,01:39the multiplication of matrices, somewhat special. And then finally what properties do these01:45may a matrices have with respect to addition and multiplication. So, let us start with01:50what is a matrix.01:51So, a matrix is really something very easy. It is a rectangular array of numbers arranged01:57in rows and columns. So, it is like a table, very much a rectangle table which you are02:04familiar with. And inside the table in various places you have numbers. So, here is an example.02:10So, the example has the numbers 1, 2, 3 and 2, 3, 4 arranged in an array, rectangular02:18array.02:19So, in your table if you want so, this is what is called the 2 by 3 matrix. So, the02:26two refers to the first, so 2, how many rows there are in this matrix and the 3 refers02:33to how many columns there are in this matrix. So, the 2 by 3 is written to the right of02:43this matrix slightly below it, so 2 rows and 3 columns. So, in general, you may have an02:52m by n matrix.02:54So, that means you have m rows in this matrix and n columns in this matrix. And we will03:00talk about the entries of this matrix. So, the ijth entry of this matrix refers to the03:06entry why is in the ith row and the jth column. So, there is a unique such entry and that03:12will be the ijth entry. So, let us look at the example that we have. Here, I will look03:17at the entries in this matrix. So, first of all this has two rows, how do the rows look03:21like?03:22Here is the first row and here is the second row and it has 3 columns, so here is the first03:33column, the second column and the third column. And now suppose I want to ask, what is the03:401, 2th entry of this matrix? So, the one, two eth entry of this matrix, so it will be03:511, 2th entry of this matrix means you look at first row, that is the first row over here04:07and you look at the second column. So, that is, the first row is 1, 2, 3 and the second04:12column is the 2, 3.04:13So, the entry that you have over there is 2. So, I will encourage you to think about04:21what is the 2, 3th entry. So, the 2 3th entry of this matrix is, so by now you have probably04:31figured out, you look at the second row and the third column. So, this is 4. So, I hope04:36you understand what it means for a matrix to be an m by n matrix that means it has m04:40rows and n columns and what it means for an entry to be the ijth entry. So, let us move04:49on.04:50And look at some special kinds of matrices. So, as we saw matrices are rectangular arrays04:55if numbers, so special shape within rectangles is the square. So, let us talk about square05:02matrices. So, square matrix is a matrix in which the number of rows is the same as the05:06number of columns. So, here is an example. So, here you have 3 rows and 3 columns.05:14So, just to jog your memory, here is the first row, here is the second row, here is the third05:23row and about the columns, here is the first column, here is the second column and here05:31is the third column. So, again just as a test, if you want to ask what is 2, 3th entry of05:42this matrix, so the 2, 3th entry of this matrix, so you look at the second row and the third05:55column that is 1. So, I hope you are comfortable with the notations.06:01So, the ith diagonal entry of a square matrix is the i ith entry. So, the, so when you have06:10a square, there is something called the diagonal of the square and we look at the ith entry06:16on the diagonal and that is the i ith entry of the matrix. So, the diagonal of the square06:22matrix is the set of diagonal matrix.06:24So, here is the set of diagonal entries and within this, this is the first diagonal entry.06:36So, this is the second diagonal entry and this is the third diagonal entry. So, the06:42diagonal entries are somewhat special because they occupy the i ith position. So, we generally06:48talk about diagonals only for square matrices.06:51So, now some special further specialization that this square matrices, so diagonal matrix07:00is one where the only non-zero entries are in the diagonal, everything else is 0. So,07:05such a thing is called a diagonal matrix. Here is an example. So, you can see that the07:10diagonal entry is here, so that is 1 minus 3 and 4.2. So, the first diagonal entry is07:161, the second diagonal entry is minus 3 and the third diagonal entry is 4.2. So, everything07:23else is 0. So, this is the diagonal matrix.07:26So, then an even more special case of this is what is called a scalar matrix. So, diagonal07:32and matrix in which all the entries in the diagonal are the same, have the same value.07:38So, it is the same number. So, this is called a scalar matrix. So, here is an example. So,07:45here you can see that every entry here is minus 3, so the first entry is minus 3, the07:49second entry is minus 3 and the third entry is minus 3.07:51They are all equal. So, this is an example of a scalar matrix. Why is this a scalar matrix?07:57So, we will see later that this behaves like minus 3, this matrix in our mind should, we08:06should think of it as minus 3. Again just to jog your memory, what is the order of this08:12matrix, meaning what are the number of rows and columns? This is a 3 by 3 matrix.08:21And even more special case is where the scale, you have a scalar matrix, but in the diagonal08:27position, the entries are all 1. So, this is called the identity matrix, this is something08:32very important and it has a special notation, it is denoted by I. So, this is capital I.08:39So, here is what I is, so this is 1 0 0; 0 1 0 and 0 0 1. So, again I will remind you08:49this is 3 by 3.08:50So, I am not saying what the size of the matrix is, so if we are talking about a 4 by 4 matrix,08:57then that will also be denoted by I and we will have 1 0 0 0; 0 1 0 0; 0 0 1 0; 0 0 009:071\. So, it depends on context as to which I we are referring to. So, in the given context,09:14it will be clear what we mean by I, meaning how many rows and columns it has.09:18But however many rows and columns it has, which of course, is the same number, the diagonal09:24must consist of ones. So, the only choice is how many rows and columns it has, which09:30will be clear from the context. So, these are the special kinds of matrices we wanted09:36to look at.09:37So, now let us look at the use of matrices. So, suppose we have a system of linear equations.09:44So, we will study more about this in the forthcoming video. So, you have a set of linear equations.09:50So, what does that mean? That means you have something like this, 3x plus 4y is 5 and 4x09:57plus 6y is 10. So, we can think of this as in terms of matrices.10:03So, how is this being done? Again this will be explained in much more detail in the forthcoming10:08video. So, the corresponding matrix is this matrix which has 2 rows and 3 columns. So,10:16I will emphasize the 3 columns here. So, the two, the first two columns correspond to the10:22coefficients of x and y.10:23So, 3, 4 and 4, 6 that is the part that is coming over here, that is this part and then10:31the entries that are on the right beyond the equals that is on the last column, those are10:38in the last column. So, this middle line is just for our own sake. We do not need to put10:45it, so as a matrix this is the same matrix as what we have without the line.10:52So, this is 3, 4, 5; 4, 6, 10. But we later see that putting that line helps us. So, for11:02now this is the corresponding matrix. So, but we will see how the line helps us later11:07on. So, that is how it is related to linear equations and this is really the main importance11:14of matrices. So, now let us move on to how do we add matrices.11:20So, here is an example. So, we will add matrices by adding corresponding entries. So, the important11:28part here is that, when we add two matrices, they must be of the same size. That means11:33they have the same number of rows and the same number of columns. Both matrices have11:37the same number of rows and both matrices have the same number of columns.11:40So, for example over here, this matrix has 3 rows and 2 columns, this matrix also has11:473 rows and 2 columns, and hence we can add this. And the resulting matrix also has 311:52rows and 2 columns. So, how do we add this? So, the addition the way it works is, we take11:591 and add it to 0, so here is 1 and 0, so we add these and in the 1 1th place we get12:091 again. We take maybe let us look at the 2, 2eth entry. So, we have a 7 and over here12:21we have a minus 7, so we add these and here we get a 0. So, you add corresponding entries.12:27So, I hope this is clear.12:30So, let us at this in a more formal way. So, the sum of two m by n matrices, apologies,12:36this should be matrices. So, the sum of two m by n matrices, A and B is calculated entry12:44wise. So, corresponding entries are added, that means you look at the i, jth entry of12:48A and the i, jth entry of B and then you add those to get the i, jeth entry of A plus B.12:55So, that is the formula; A plus B ij that means the i jth entry of A plus B that is13:01what is in the left that is the same as the i jth entry of A plus the i jth entry of B.13:09So, maybe one more example. So, suppose we have these two matrices, so this is, this13:18has 1 row and 3 columns and this has 1 row and 3 columns.13:25And so the resulting matrix also has 1 row and 3 columns. And how do we add these? We13:28add these entry wise. So, the first entry that is the 1 1th entry, we have half plus13:342, so we get 5 halves. For the second entry we have minus three fourth minus 3, so we13:41get minus 15 by 4 and for the third entry we have 3 minus 1 which is 2. So, I hope it13:50is, so the addition of matrices is fairly easy. I hope you are getting the hang of this.13:58So, the next thing we want to look at is scalar multiplication. So, how do we multiply a matrix14:06by a number? So, to multiply a matrix by a number, we multiply each entry of that matrix14:14by that number. So, here we have 3 times the matrix 1, 2, 3; 4, 5, 6. 1, 2, 3 is in the14:22first row; 4, 5, 6 is in the second row. So, what do we do?14:26We do this by multiplying each entry. So, this is 3 times 1, 3 times 2, 3 times 3 and14:36then 3 times 4, 3 times 5, and 3 times 6, bracket complete and which is exactly what14:48we get as the matrix 3 times 6 times 9; 3, 6, 9 in the first row and 12, 15, 18 in the14:55second row.14:56So, let us make this formal. So, the product of a matrix A with a number c, so this is15:04denoted by c times A and the i, jth entry of the product is c times the i, jth entry15:11of A. So, c times A i, jth entry is c times Aij. Then let us move on to matrix multiplication.15:25So, this is really the relatively harder thing to do. So, let us look at how to multiply15:33matrices. So, here is an example. So, let me explain that example before we see how15:41this equality comes about. So, let us explain this 7, how did I get 7? So, in order to get15:477, so 7 is the which entry of this matrix is the 1, 1th entry of this matrix.15:54So, for the 1, 1th entry I look at the first row of the first matrix and then I look at16:04the corresponding entries of the first column of the second matrix. So, the first 1 and16:132 came from here and the second 1 and 3 came from here. So, how do I, so what is the sum?16:27This is 1 plus 6 which is indeed 7. So, that is how I got that 7.16:32Suppose I want to know what is the, how did I get this 22, let us ask for 22. So, first16:39let us ask, 22 is which position? So, 22 in the is in the 2, 2th position. So, in order16:45to get the 2, 2th positions, I should look at the second row and then I should look at16:55the second column and then I should multiply corresponding entries and add them.17:02So, I get 3 times 2 plus 4 times 4. So, this is 6 plus 24, 6 plus 16 which is indeed 22.17:24So, I get 6 plus 16 which is indeed 22. So, let us maybe do one more entry. Let us look17:33at the 1, 3th entry, 13, how do I get this entry. So, 13 is the 1, 3th entry. So, for17:41the 1, 3th entry, I take the first row which is 1, 2 and I take the third column which17:51is 3, 5.17:53So, I get 1 times 3 plus 2 times 5 which is 3 plus 10 which is 13. So, I hope the process18:11is clear of how do we get these entries in this matrix. So, I will encourage you to find18:18the other entries, how do we get these 15, 10 and 29.18:23Maybe let us do one more example. So, here is another example, so we have the matrix18:301, 2, 3, 4 times the matrix 5, 6 in columns, in a single column. So, I want to look at18:38how did we get 17 and 39. So, for the 17, what do we do? It is a 1, 1th entry, so I18:47look at the first row and I look at the first column.18:52So, of course, here is here we have only one column, so we have 1 time multiply the corresponding18:59entries and add them, plus 2 times 6, this is 5 plus 12 and which is 17. So, for the19:0939, what do I do? I do 3 times 5 plus 4 times 6 which is 15 plus 24, namely this is 39.19:18So, I hope it is clear how we are getting these entries.19:22So, now he do I abstractly define matrix multiplication. So, if I have two matrices, A and B, how do19:32I multiply them? So, note here one of the important parts. Here, as in the previous19:39example, the matrix sizes were very important. So, we had a 2 by 2 matrix, we multiply it19:47to a 2 by 1 matrix. So, what was important about this?19:52The most important part was that these two things were the same and the20:062 here. So, the number of columns in the first matrix must be the same as the number of rows20:13in the second matrix. So, the number of columns in the first matrix must equal the number20:31of rows in the second matrix. Why do we need that? Otherwise, there will be a mismatch.20:42So, here I have a 1 and 2 that is a number of, so how many entries do I have?20:47I have 2 entries here that is corresponded to the number of columns. And how many entries20:51do I have here? 5 and the 5 and 6, there are 2 entries which corresponds to the number20:55of rows. If I had one more entry, then I would not know where to multiply it by. So, in order21:02for this to make sense, the number of rows of the first matrix, the number of columns21:08of the first matrix must be same as the number of rows of the second matrix.21:13So, let us, with this caveat let us define matrix multiplication. So, here you have two21:19matrices, the first has size m by n and the second one has size n by p, then the product21:26has size m by p. So, this m is the number of rows of the first matrix, and the p is21:32the number of columns of the second matrix. And how do we define the ij-th entry of A21:38B?21:39So, for the ij-th entry you look at the ith row of A, look at the corresponding entries21:45of the jth column of B, multiply those and add them up. So, abstractly this is summation21:54k is 1 through n Aik times Bkj. So, if you find this formula cumbersome, go back to the22:00examples, you will see it exactly matches with what we have done.22:05Now, the important remark which I want to reiterate it, I said this before, but I want22:12to reiterate this, the multiplication of matrices A and B is defined only when the number of22:18columns of A is the same as the number of rows of B. Very important, otherwise we do22:23not defined multiplication of matrices. So, here is another example.22:28So, 1, 2, 3 times the matrix 2, 0.8, 5, 0.7; half minus 2 is 13.5 minus 3.8. So, 1 row22:39and 2 columns. Where did I get 1 row and 2 columns from? That is because over here, so22:45first of all is it defined, can I multiply these at all? Yes. Because the number of columns22:51of the first one is the same as the number of rows of the second one and then in the22:56resulting matrix what was my, what was the size? So, this 1 is what came here and this23:062 is what came here?23:13So, the resulting matrix has size 1 by 2, so 1 row and 2 columns. And how do we get23:20the first entry? So, to get the first entry, we do 1 times 2 plus 2 times 5 plus 3 times23:25half. To get the second entry, we do 1 times 0.8 plus 2 times 0.7 plus 3 times minus 223:35and this is what we will get. So, I will encourage you to check that what I just said is exactly23:41this formula over here. So, that is matrix multiplication. So, let us look at a few special23:49cases of matrix multiplication.23:50So, remember that we had scalar matrices, so scalar matrices were diagonal matrices23:57in which all the diagonal terms were equal. So, they look like the matrix on the left,24:03c 0 0, 0 c 0, 0 0 c. So, let us do this multiplication. So, the first term, so first of all is it24:15well defined, so how many rows and columns does this have, this is a 3 by 3 matrix. How24:21many rows does this have? 3. And how many columns does it have? 2. So, this is a 3 by24:272 matrix.24:28So, indeed we can multiply this because the number of column here is 3 which is the same24:32as the number of rows here. And when you multiply these, you will see that the first entry for24:37example the 1, 1-th entry of this is c times 1 plus 0 times 3 plus 0 times 5. So, it is24:45just c times 1 which is c. The 1, 2-th entry is c times 2 plus 0 times 4 plus 0 times 624:55which is c times 2. So, 2 times c.24:58So, you can see what is happening. Each entry of this second matrix, each entry over here25:03is getting multiplied by c. So, I can pull that c out and think of this as scalar multiplication25:09by the constant c, multiplication by the scalar c. So, that is what special about scalar matrices.25:20So, scalar multiplication by a scalar can also be thought of as multiplication by a25:28matrix, namely the scalar matrix of the corresponding size.25:33So, to reiterate what I said, scalar multiplication by c is multiplication by the scalar matrix25:42c times the identity matrix. In particular, if we put c is 1, we get the identity matrix.25:50So, from there what do we get? We get that if you have a let us say 3 by 3 matrix, then25:57if you take the identity matrix of size 3 by 3, again as I said identity you will know26:03from context which identity matrix we are using.26:06So, I times A is the same as A because you can pull out the 1, so nothing is happening.26:12You are not multiplying by anything, meaning you are multiplying by 1 which is the same26:16as A times I. So, I will encourage you to check the formulae. And more generally if26:23you take instead of 3 by 3, if you take 3 be n, then if you multiply by a 3 by 3 matrix26:29I on the left, you will get A again.26:34And if you take m by 3 and multiply by I, you will again get A. Again the 3 here is26:40not relevant. You could have used any n instead of 3, but often our examples will be in small26:48size that is why we have mentioned 3 here. So, there is something special about the identity26:54matrix that is the point of this bunch of things here.26:57So, identity matrix acts like 1. So, when you multiply a number by 1, you get back the27:03same matrix, the same number. The same thing happens with the identity matrix. When you27:08multiply by the identity matrix, you do not change anything, you get back the same matrix.27:13So, identity matrix acts like 1, it behaves like 1.27:19So, finally let us quickly summarize some properties of matrix addition and multiplication.27:27So, if you add 3 matrices, it does not matter which order you add it in, so this is called27:34associativity. If you multiply 3 matrices, it does not matter which ones you, which two27:40you multiply first, but very importantly you have to multiply them in the same order. You27:44cannot change the order.27:48If you do A plus B then that is the same as B plus A, so you, matrix addition is what27:54is called commutative, does not matter which order you (multi) add them in. But it matters28:02how you multiply them. A times B is in general not going to be equal to B times A. In fact,28:08it may not even make sense to multiply B times A. Why is that? Because the number of A times28:16B means that the number of rows of B is the same as a number of columns of A.28:21On the other hand, B times A means the number of columns of B is the same as the number28:27of rows of A. This may not happen. So, for example if you take something like this and28:36I can multiply by 1, but the other way it does not make sense, this does not make sense,28:53this does not make sense, I hope it is clear.28:56This has 1 column and 3 rows; this has 2 rows and 3 columns. So, it does not, you cannot29:06multiply these two. So, it may not even make sense to multiply them, they may be of, even29:11if you can multiply them, they may end up being of completely different size and even29:15if the sizes are same, they may not be equal. So, I encourage you to check such things.29:23And then some more properties So, if you multiply this by a scalar, if we have scalar multiplication29:29remember, so if you do lambda times A plus B, then that is the same as lambda times A29:34plus lambda times B. So, this is scalar (multi). So, lambda is a real number, so lambda is29:42a scalar.29:44Similarly, if you do lambda times AB, then you can first do lambda times A and then multiply29:50that to B and there will be no problems, it will be the same number, sorry the same matrix.29:57And in fact you can go ahead and shift that lambda inside. So, scalars can be shifted30:02inside. So, here you can change lambda to go inside.30:06So, A times B plus C is a same as A times B plus A times C. And then finally, A plus30:14B times C is A times C plus B times C. So, these are identities, how do I check these?30:22So, you, we have to check these based on the rules of addition and multiplication. So,30:27even if you do not formally understand how to check them, in given examples I hope you30:33will be able to actually compute, so I suggest that you actually compute things like this.30:39So, for example I will give you an example here, which I suggest that you compute and30:46see what happens. So, see if for example this is the same as 2 times 1 plus 2 times 3, 430:55and so on. So, let us quickly recall what we have studied today. We have studied what31:00is a matrix; we have studied special matrices, so diagonal, scalar and the identity matrix.31:07We have studied what is the relationship of a matrix with linear equations.31:13And then we looked at matrix addition, we looked at scalar multiplication of matrices31:18meaning, multiplying a scalar to a matrix and we looked at multiplying 2 matrices. Very31:23important the number of columns of the first matrix must be the same as the number of rows31:30of the second matrix, only then can we multiply. And then we looked at some properties of all31:35these operations. So, thank you and see you in the next video.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.