---
title: "L1.3: Systems of Linear Equations :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L1.3: Systems of Linear Equations :: IITM Online Degree

L1.3: Systems of Linear Equations

Transcript Language

English

00:14Welcome to the maths 2 component of the online B.Sc degree in data science. In today's video00:21we are going to look at systems of linear equations. So, what are the contents of this00:26video? So, let us see what is there, what is the system of linear equations? What is00:33its relation with matrices? And finally, how many solutions can it have? So, these are00:39the three things we are going to see today.00:42Let us begin with an example, so in this example we have 3 buyers and we have 3 items, so buyer00:50A buys rice 8 kg s of rice, 8 kg s of dal and 4 litres of oil, buyer B buys 12 kg s00:57of rice, 5 kg s of dal and 7 litres of oil and buyer C buys 3 kg s of rice, 2 kg s of01:05dal and 5 litres of oil.01:08So, suppose these buyers paid some amount of money to the shopkeeper, namely A paid01:17rupees 1960, B paid rupees 2215 and C paid rupees 1135, so I have this data. Now, we01:28want to find the price of each item using this data. So, how do I write this as a system01:34of linear equations? So, we will assume that the price of rice is rupees x per kg, we will01:43assume that the price of dal is rupees y per kg and we will assume that the price of oil01:49is rupees z per litre.01:52So, then what do we get for the first buyer? We get that 8 times x, because he bought he01:58or she bought 8 kg of rice, so 8 times x plus 8 times y 8 kg s of dal plus 4 times z is02:091960\. Similarly, we get the next two equations. So, this is what a system of linear equations02:17looks like and now from this data we would like to solve this system and get what is02:24the price of rice, dal and oil.02:27So, I am going to quickly solve this. So, I think many of you may have solved such things02:34in school, so how do we solve this? So, maybe we can take the first equation and divide02:40it by 2, so if you do that, we get 4x plus 4y plus 2z is 980, this the first equation02:50divided by 2 and then we will multiply this new equation by 3, so that I get a 12x, so02:5712x plus 12y plus 6z which is 2940.03:04Then I take this equation and subtract out the second equation over here, I will subtract03:12out the second equation over here, so if I do that, what do I get? So, the 12x is subtracted03:19out and what we get is 7y minus z is 725. So, now we have an equation in terms of y03:34and z, now similarly for the third equation what we can do is we can use the third equation03:47and multiply the third equation by 4, so that we get a 12x.03:56So, multiplying the third equation by 4, we will get 12x plus 8y plus 20z is 4 times 113504:10and then we will use this equation and subtract out the second equation, so what we get is04:20another equation in terms of y and z, so the equation we get in terms of y and z is 3y04:29plus 13z is 2325, so I will encourage it to do this. So, now we have two equations with04:39two unknowns, namely y and z, so let us try and solve this.04:44So, well we can actually solve this by putting z equals 7y minus 725 and substitute in the04:54second one, so if you substitute in the second one we get 3y plus 13 times 7y minus 725 is05:032325\. So, if you simplify this what you will get is 94 times y is 11750, so then y is 1175005:23divided by 94 which is 125. So, we have computed the price of dal, it is rupees 125 per kg,05:31so we will substitute y is 125 in this equation over here and we will get z, so z is from05:43here we will get that z is 150.05:49And then now we know y and z, so we will put them in some suitable equation and we can05:54get x. So, x is going to be 45, so I will encourage you to check these. So, what was06:07the point of this? The point of this was we had a real life problem in involving some06:12costs and so on, so we have three equations.06:16And then we use some unknowns to denote the things that we wanted to compute and then06:20we had three linear equations in those three unknowns and then we solve the system of linear06:26equations. And we computed that x is 45, y is 125 and z is 150 which means the price06:32of rice is rupees 45 per kg, the price of dal is rupees 125 per kg and the price of06:37oil is rupees 150 per litre. So, this I hope this convinces you that solving a system of06:44linear equations is something useful.06:50So, what is the system of linear equations? So, before that we have to ask, what is a07:00linear equation? So, a linear equation is something of the form a1x1 plus a2x2 plus07:06anxn is b, this is what a linear equation looks like, this is one linear equation. So,07:14what are the x1 x2 xn these are variables or unknowns, these are the things that we07:18want to compute, this was like the x y z in our previous example.07:25And then what are the a1 a2 an s? These are what are called coefficients, these are going07:29to be real numbers, these are things we will assume, these are numbers will assume that07:33we know. And then b is also a real number. So, here is an example, so 2x plus 3y plus07:455z is minus 9 and here x y z and are variables and the 2, 3, 5, are coefficients.07:55So, what is the system of linear equations? So, a system of linear equations, so that08:01means you have several linear equations, we saw what is one linear equation, so it is08:08something of the form a1x1 plus a2x2 plus anxn is b, instead now we have many such equations08:15but in the same set of unknowns, so x1 x2 xn remains the same but the coefficients and08:21the constant at the end change.08:22So, here is an example, so we have 3x plus 2y plus z is 6, x minus half y plus two third08:33z is 7 6th and 4x plus 6y minus 10z is 0. So, I will encourage you to solve this equation08:43similar to how we did it in the first example. So, if you do that you should get the answer08:54x is 1, y is 1 and then 1 is 1. So, what are the unknowns or the variables here?09:01The x, y and z are the unknowns of the variable, so traditionally you represent if you have09:05one unknown it x, if you have two unknowns x and y, if you have three unknown x, y and09:11z and if you have four or more unknowns you take x1 x2 x3 x4 and up till as many unknowns09:18as you have. So, what is the solution to this system of linear equations?09:25That means if you put x equals 1, y equals 1 and z equals 1 in this system here, then09:33these equations are solved. So, let us check that, so 3 times 1 plus 2 times 1 plus 1 is09:41indeed 6, 1 minus half times 1 plus 2 3rd times 1, so let us 1 minus so that is 1 minus09:51so that is half plus 2 3rd which is indeed 7 by 6.10:01And then similarly you have 4 times 1 plus 6 times 1 minus 10 times 1 is 0. So, I hope10:14it means you understand what it means, for a system of linear equations to have a set10:21of solutions, so when you put x, y and z to be some particular numbers then these equations10:28should be satisfied, that means these equality should be true, that means we say we have10:37got solution.10:38So, what is the general system of linear equations? So, you have m linear equations, that means10:43you have m equations and you have n unknowns, so n unknowns mean you have x1 x2 xn, then10:49how do we write these? We write this as a11 x1 plus a12 x2 plus a1n xn is b1, a21 x1 plus10:59a22 x2 plus a2 nx2 is b2 and all the way up to am1 x1 plus am2 x2 plus amn xn, is bm.11:10So, if you want the ith equation, then this is ai1 x1 plus ai2 x2 plus ain xn is bn this11:33is the ith equation in this system.11:37So, what is the connection with matrices? So, this is really important part of this11:49video, so the system of linear equations is equivalent to a matrix equation of the form11:55a times x is b, so in a previous video we have seen what it means to multiply matrices.12:01So, here Ax and b are matrices, so A is an m by n matrix and what are the entries of12:09this matrix? They are exactly the Aij s that we saw in our previous slide.12:14So, this matrix A consists of the Aij s, x is a column vector with n entries, what are12:20the entries? x1 x2 xn exactly or unknowns and b is the column vector b1 b2 bm, so this12:31is A that from our previous slide these are the coefficient, so this A is called the coefficient12:43matrix. What is x? x is a column matrix, so it that means it consist of one column, so12:50it is the column x1 x2 xn, it is a matrix with n rows and 1 column, it is a column matrix12:58consisting of the unknowns.13:03And b is the set of constants, so it is a again a column matrix consisting on the constants.13:09So, this is a m by 1 matrix, this is n by 1 and this is m by n. And now if you multiply13:17these first of all let us ask does it make sense indeed this is m by n and this is n13:23by 1, so it makes sense to multiply these and whatever the product is it will be of13:28size m by 1.13:30So, we are saying that a product is exactly the left-hand side of the system of linear13:40equations that we had on the previous slide and on the right hand side we will have these13:46constant b1 b2 bm. So, the previous system can be expressed in the form ax equals b,13:55so the important part here is that any system of linear equations can be expressed in terms14:01of matrices as a matrix by matrix multiplication. Let us, look at some examples.14:09So, let us look at this example like we had before, 3x plus 2y plus z is 6, x minus half14:15y plus 2 3rd z is 7 6, 4x plus 6y minus 10z is 0, so how do we represent this in terms14:23of matrices? So, in terms of matrices this is the coefficient matrix, so we collect together14:30all the coefficients and put them in the correct places. So, the first row is the 2 1, that14:37is what occurs as a coefficient of in the first equation.14:40The second row is 1 minus half 2 3rd s that is what occurs in the second equation and14:45the third row is 4 6 minus 10, that is what occurs in the third equation. What is x? x14:51is x y z, the unknowns or the variable. And what is b? b is the set of constants on the15:01right, so 6 7 6 and 0 and I will encourage you to multiply A and x.15:07So, multiply A by x and see that you get exactly this thing over here as a column matrix, so15:24you get exactly this as your matrix. This is A times x and this thing on the right is15:33b. And what are the system of linear equations saying? Saying Ax equals b. So, we have rewritten15:41this example as a in terms of matrix multiplication. Let us look at our first example.15:50So, this was 8x plus 8y plus 4z is 1960, 12x plus 5y plus 7z is 2215, 3x plus 2y plus 5z15:57is 1135. How do we write this in terms of matrices? So, the coefficient matrix here16:07is going to be 8 8 4, 12 5 7, and 3 2 5, the matrix x which is a column matrix, that will16:28be x y z and the matrix of coefficients sorry of constants is going to be 1960 2215 1135.16:40And once again, I will encourage you to check that Ax is equal to be exactly captures the16:54systems of linear equations upstairs.16:55Now, I will point out one small strangeness in this entire notation you will see that17:04the matrix here is called x, whereas you also have a variable called x, so be very careful17:13to distinguish between these two, so which one is your variable and which one is your17:19matrix, so when I when we are writing this matrix, this are 3 rows and 1 column, so is17:25the matrix this is a column matrix of size 3, so 3 rows and 1 column.17:31And inside it is the one one entry is x which is exactly our variable inside in our equations.17:38So, this is an unfortunate fact that there is a clash of notations, but that is how it17:47is and it with some practice you will get used to it. So, we have seen two examples17:53of how the connection between system of linear equation and how to represent them in matrix18:00terms.18:01So, now let us talk about solutions, solutions to a linear system. So, we saw I explicitly18:07found out the solutions for the first example and I asked you to check that x is 1, y is18:151, z is 1 the solution for the second example, so in general what can we say about solutions18:22of a linear system? So, it turns out that there are only three possibilities either18:29a system has infinitely many solutions or a system has a single unique solution or a18:37system has no solution.18:39So, these are the only three possibilities. So, it cannot happen that a system of linear18:49equation over the real numbers has only three solutions, this is not possible. If it has18:57three solutions it will have infinitely many solutions, it cannot have exactly three solutions,19:04so it can have either 0 solutions, 1 solution or infinitely many solutions.19:11So, let us see examples of where this comes from. So, suppose we have to buyers A and19:21B and buyer A buys 2 kg s of rice and 1 kg of dal, buyer B buys 4 kg s of rice and 219:29kg s of dal.19:31And they pay 215 rupees and 430 rupees respectively. So, again as in the first example, we want19:39to find out the price of rice and the price of dal, so we put this into the form of linear19:48equations. So, if you follow the first example you will quickly see that this is 2 times19:52x plus y is 215, 4 times x plus 2y is 430. And there are infinitely many x and y satisfying20:01both the equations. So, I will encourage you to find out why that is the case.20:09Let me give you one example, I mean let me at least show you two examples, two solutions20:17and you can find as many more as you want, one solution is x is 0 and y is 215, that20:27is one solution. So, check that indeed this works. Another solution is x is 215 by 2 so20:36that is 107.5 and y is 0. So, this is another solution. And I will encourage you to find20:46more solutions. So, what is happening here in terms of whether some geometry involved?20:52So, let us draw this picture. So, the idea is that if you draw remember that if you have21:01the equations correspond to straight lines, yes, this is something you have seen in math21:071, so you have 2x plus y is 215 and 4x plus 2y is 430 and both of them give you the same21:17straight line, so any point on this line is going to satisfy is going to be a solution.21:24So, every point on this line is a solution point. So, now you can find as many solutions21:36as you want. So, this is the geometry behind why it has infinitely many solutions.21:44Let us, do an example where it has no solutions. So, again we have the same situation in the21:53A and B go to the shop by same amount of rice and dal as the previous limit, so 4 kg s of22:00rice and 2 kg s of dal and 2 kg s of rice and 1 kg of dal respectively, but this time22:06the seller gives a discount to B, the seller is in a happy mood the shopkeeper and they22:13give a discount to B.22:14So, A pays 215 rupees and B paid 400 rupees, in the previous example B had paid 430, this22:25time they got a discount of 400 rupees. Now, after returning home, they tried to solve22:30this system again put x and y to be the price of rice and dal respectively, so we get 2x22:38plus y is 215, 4x plus 2y is 400, let us try and solve this system of linear equations.22:45So, if you try and solve this, so let us take the first equation and double it.22:51So if you double the first equation you get 4x plus 2y is 430, on the other hand the second22:57equation is 4x plus 2y is 400, so what does that mean? That means 400 is equal to 430,23:08so there is something really really wrong, this is this is something is going very wrong.23:20So, of course, we know that 400 is not 430 that means there is no x and y for which this23:33can be solved, so there is no solution here. What goes wrong?23:40So, the reason there is no solution here is that if you draw the lines in this case, they23:46are parallel lines, so they would not intersect at all. And the intersection is exactly what23:51will give you the solution. So, in the previous case you had both the equations at the same23:59line, so it was like you are two lines, which were the same, so the intersected in infinitely24:03many points. So, here you have two lines which are parallel they do not intersect at all24:08and so there is no solution.24:10Finally, let us do the example the last example where you have a unique solution. So, in this24:19case buyer A buys 2 kg s of rice and 1 kg of dal and buyer B buys rice 3 kg s of rice24:26and 1 kg of dal.24:27And buyer A pays 215 rupees buyer B pays 260 rupees, let us write down the equation so24:33it is 2x plus y is 253, 3x plus y is 260.24:37And I will encourage you to solve that equation. The point here is you have two lines, 2x plus24:44y is, maybe let us go back 2x plus y is 215 and 3x plus y is 260, so it is clear from24:53here that x is 45 and once we know that x is 45 we can compute that y is, so 215 minus25:0890, so that is 125. So, this is like in our first example, so the price of rice is 4525:18rupees per kg and the price of dal is 215 rupees per kg.25:21And you can check here that that is exactly where these intersect, so this is on the x25:26axis will intersects at 45 and on the y axis, 125 and that is exactly the point of intersection.25:36So, that is why there is a unique solution. So, you can draw these lines and wherever25:42they intersect is where you have an equation, you have a solution. So, let us recall quickly25:48what we study today.25:49We have studied what is the system of linear equations; we have study now to write it in25:54terms of matrices, particularly using matrix multiplication with unknowns where x was a26:02column matrix of variables. And then we have seen that what is the solution to system of26:09linear equations and then we saw that there are three possible cases either a system has26:14no solution or it has one unique solution or it has infinitely many solutions. That26:20is all for today. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.