---
title: "L1.5: Determinants (part 2) :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L1.5: Determinants (part 2) :: IITM Online Degree

L1.5: Determinants (part 2)

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the Maths 2  component of the online BSC program  00:19on data science. Today's video is on  determinants, this is the second part of  00:26the videos on determinants. So, let us  recall first what we did in part 1.  00:32So, recall from part 1, that we  defined the determinant of a 1  00:37by 1 matrix so if a is singleton a then  determinant of A is just that number a.  00:45If A is the 2 by 2 matrix a, b, c, d, then  determinant of A is a d minus b c you multiply  00:53the diagonal terms and subtract out the off  diagonal terms and if you have a 3 by 3 matrix,  01:02then we defined the determinant by what we call  expanding with respect to the first row.  01:10So, what that meant was you take the first the 1  1 entry of the first row, the first entry of the  01:16first row and then disregard everything  in the first row and the first column  01:22you get a 2 by 2 matrix remaining take its  determinant and multiply that with a 1 1  01:28that is the first term. For the  second term you look at a 1 2  01:31and do the same process disregard everything  in the first row and the second column,  01:36multiply the determinant of the resulting 2  by 2 matrix with a 1 2 and for the third term  01:43you look at a 1 3 disregard everything  in the first row and the third column,  01:48take the determinant of the resulting 2  by 2 matrix and multiply it with a 1 3.  01:55And then you alternately add these meaning take  the first expression minus the second expression  02:01plus the third expression. So,  that was the determinant of a. So,  02:05the determinant of the 3 by 3 matrix was defined  in terms of determinants for 2 by 2 matrices  02:11and then we can expand this out we can work out  explicitly what the expression is and you get some  02:19rather long and nasty 6 term expression.  02:25So, let us do an example just to refresh  ourselves maybe a 3 by 3 example.  02:30So, here is a 3 by 3 matrix 2 4 3, 0 8 7,  0 0 9 so maybe I should mention that such  02:37a matrix is called an upper triangular matrix  because it has zeros below the diagonal.  02:46So, let us compute its determinant, so determinant  of A is 2 times the matrix 8 7 0 9 which is what  02:54is remaining if you disregard everything in the  first row and column minus 4 times determinant  03:02of 0 7 0 9, plus 3 times determinant of 0 8  0 0 and then if we work out what these are  03:08using the determinants of 2 by  2 matrices, we will get 2 times  03:128 times 9 minus 7 times 0 which is 72 minus 0  minus 4 times 0 minus 0 plus 3 times 0 minus 0,  03:25so this is just 2 times 72 minus 4 times 0 plus  3 times 0 which is just 2 times 72 which is 144  03:33and I will ask you to notice something important  which is that this is 2 times 8 times 9  03:40which is exactly what we have on the diagonal. So, these are the diagonal entries over here and  03:47that is what we got, so the determinant of this  matrix A is the product of the diagonal entries.  03:54So, I hope you followed both the  computation and the fact that it is  03:58the product of the diagonal  entries. So, this is not some  04:03fact specific to this example, this is a  general fact for what we call any upper  04:09triangular matrix or any lower triangular matrix.  So, for such matrices the determinant is the  04:14product of the diagonal elements. So, I will just quickly recall what  04:20is an upper triangular matrix as I said in the  beginning. So, an upper triangular matrix means  04:29if you so this is a general matrix of size n  by n, so this is called upper triangular if  04:37you look at the diagonal and everything below the  diagonal is 0. So, all these entries are zeros.  04:44So, we are going to write this as a i j is 0 if  i is greater than j. So, if the matrix satisfies  04:57this property it is an upper triangular  matrix and this is how it looks like.  05:01Similarly, so then so this is upper triangular.  So, similarly we have lower triangular, so a lower  05:10triangular matrix. So, this is  again n by n, that is if a i j is 0  05:19if now this time i is strictly less than j. So,  how does that look like, not a table but a matrix,  05:35so this part must be 0 and these elements can be  anything that any numbers. So, for such matrices  05:47the determinant is the product of the diagonal  elements. So, of course we know this only for  05:543 by 3 and I will suggest that you check  this for 3 by 3 and 2 by 2 matrices.  06:01So, let us move on to a special kind of matrix  namely if you have a matrix then its transpose,  06:11so let us define the transpose  and compute its determinant.  06:14So, in general if you have an m by n matrix,  the transpose of this matrix is a new matrix  06:25of size n by m so it has n rows and m columns.  So, remember the first one had m rows and n  06:30columns a and m rows in columns, so a transpose  has n rows and m columns and its ij-th entry  06:38is a j i. So, the ij-th entry of a transpose  is whatever was the jith entry of A. So just,  06:52this is the notation it is called A superscript  T, so T is for transpose and its definition  06:58as we noted is A transpose i j is A j i. So, just for example if A is a 3 by 3 matrix  07:08then a transpose is again 3 by 3. So,  square matrices the transpose has the  07:15same size it is also a square matrix of the  same size and what happens to the entries,  07:20so if A is like this a 1 1 a 1 2 a 1 3 and so on  then a transpose is a 1 1, a 2 1, a 3 1, a 1 2,  07:31a 2 2, a 3 2, a 1 3, a 2 3, a 3 3. So, what  happened here these two entries got interchanged,  07:40these two entries got interchanged,  so the diagonal remains the same.  07:46So, it reflects about the diagonal  if you prefer a more geometric  07:50way of thinking about it. So, that is what happens  in the transpose. So, what do we want to do now?  07:57We want to compute what is the determinant of  the transpose. So, let us work this out. So,  08:02determinant of a transpose, so we have a clear  formula for the determinant so let us use that.  08:09So, we look at the 1 1 term of A transpose  and we multiply by the determinant of what  08:15is left when we drop the first row and column  and minus the 1 2 term of the transpose times  08:23determinant of whatever is left when we drop  the first row and second column of A transpose  08:30and plus the 1 3 term of A transpose times  determinant of whatever is left when you drop the  08:36first row and the third column of A transpose. So, if we do that then this is exactly the  08:42expression we get and now we can  work out explicitly what happens  08:46and you will see that the final expression you get  is just some is just the same as the expression  08:56for determinant of A except that the terms have  changed places but it is the same expression.  09:02So, this is just determinant of A. So, what is  the upshot? If you take the transpose of A square  09:08matrix, then its determinant remains unchanged  and we have in fact proved this in the 3 by 3 case  09:15I will request that you do it for the 2 by 2 as  well, 1 by 1 there is of course nothing to do.  09:22So, now let us move on to minors and  cofactors. So, this is a very important  09:26idea and this is what is going to help us  to generalize the determinant to the n by n  09:34situation meaning where the size  of the square matrix is n by n.  09:39So, now suppose A is an n by n square matrix  where n is at most 4 we will do it in this  09:45particular case so n is so either it is a 2 by 2  matrix or a 3 by 3 matrix or a 4 by 4 matrix.  09:52Then the minor of the entry in the ith row  and jth column is the determinant of the sub  09:57matrix formed by deleting the ith row and  the jth column. So, we have been doing this  10:02process in computing the determinant, so to  compute the determinant of the 3 by 3 matrix  10:09for the first expression in the determinant  we take a 1 1 times determinant of the 2 by  10:172 matrix which is obtained by deleting the first  row and first column. So, now we are talking about  10:23just that part, just that operation. So, you look at the ith row and the jth  10:28column and you delete those and then you  get a matrix of size n minus 1 by n minus 1  10:35and then you look at its determinant. So,  now this makes sense because we have defined  10:40determinants for 2 by 2, 1 by 1, 2 by 2 and 3 by 3  matrices. So, if you take a matrix of size 4 by 4  10:49and you delete the ith row and the jth column  you will get matrix of size 3 by 3 and then  10:54you take its determinant. So, this is called  the ij-th minor and its denoted by m i j.  11:01So, here is an example, I said a lot  of words so here is a explicit example.  11:08So if a is a 3 by 3 matrix as written here a 1  1, a 1 2, a 1 3, a 2 1, a 2 2, a 2 3 and a 3 1,  11:15a 3 2, a 3 ,3 then the 1 1 minor the 1 1th minor  is nothing but determinant of a 2 2, a 2 3, a 3 2,  11:25a 3 3. So, this is what you obtain by dropping the  first row and first column, this is exactly the  11:30kind of operation we have been using in computing  determinants by expansion along the first row and  11:43let us go ahead and first define  what is the ij-th cofactor.  11:47So, the ij-th cofactor is where you take the  ij-th minor and multiply it by a minus 1 to  11:56the power i plus j. Why is the sign coming, so  as we saw in the expression for the determinant  12:04there was an alternating sign, the first term  was with a plus then you subtracted the second  12:11term then you added the third term, so it was  alternating. So, somehow this minus 1 to the i  12:17plus j is supposed to take care of that sign  that is why we have the sign over here. So,  12:24it is the same number but it could be with a minus  sign depending on what is i and what is j.  12:30So, for example C 1 1 is just minus 1 to the  power 1 plus 1 which is minus 1 to the power 2, so  12:35minus 1 squared is 1 times M 1 1, so it is minus  1 square times M 1 1 which is just M 1 1. So,  12:46as a similar in similar light if we have C 2 3,  then this is minus 1 to the 2 plus 3 times M 2 3,  12:57but now 2 plus 3 is 5 which is odd so minus 1 to  the power 5 is minus 1. So, this is minus M 2 3.  13:05So, it depends on what is i and j  accordingly we will pick up a minus sign.  13:12So, I hope it is clear what  the cofactors and minors are.  13:19So, let us now try to rewrite the determinant  in terms of minus and cofactors.  13:27So, for a 3 by 3 matrix so we have determinant  of AA is this is expansion along the first row,  13:33this is the definition a 1 1 times determinant  of the matrix obtained by deleting the first row  13:40and column and then you take its determinant  but that is exactly what we called the minor  13:47and then minus a 1 2 times determinant of a 2 1,  a 2 3, a 3 1, a 3 3, so you deleted the first row  13:54and second column and then took the determinant  but that is exactly what we call the 1 2th minor  14:00and then similarly for the third term. So, we can rewrite it now in terms of our  14:07minus as a 1 1 times M 1 1 minus a 1 2 times  M 1 2 plus a 1 3 times M 1 3. So, we are just  14:18rewriting these determinants as minus this was the  definition if you remember from the previous slide  14:25and then if I want to take care of this sign,  there is a minus sign here and I want to write  14:30everything as a plus so then I can rewrite this  as a 1 1 times the 1 1th cofactor plus a 1 2 times  14:35the 1 2th cofactor plus a 1 3 times the 1 3th  cofactor. So, that is why we introduce cofactors  14:44if we want to not remember the signs, then we will  take care of those signs using the cofactors.  14:51So, this is the expression for the determinant  of a 3 by 3 matrix in terms of the minors  15:01and remember the minors meant we or the cofactors  the minors meant that you compute determinants of  15:082 by 2 matrices. So, now we can go beyond, so  maybe first we should remark that this formula  15:19works even for a 2 by 2 matrix, so if you take a  2 by 2 matrix say a b c d, then the determinant is  15:27a d minus b c so we can rewrite that as A times  M 1 1 minus B times M 1 2, so C is exactly  15:39M 1 2 and d is exactly M 1 1 or if you want a  plus sign then we can write it as a times C 1  15:451 plus b times C 1 2, so check this. So, now we can use this to generalize  15:53beyond n is 3. So, let us generalize this to A  4 by 4 so suppose you have a 4 by 4 matrix now  16:00then how do we define the determinant. So, the  determinant is this is expansion along the first  16:08row so the determinant is you take minus 1 to the  power 1 plus j because we have the first row here  16:18a 1 j times M 1 j, this is exactly the expression  that we have up here this is exactly this  16:26expression here, except that this is for 3 by 3  I am writing the same expression for 4 by 4.  16:34And if you want to take care of the signs not  bother about the signs then you can write it just  16:40as a sum of a 1 j times the corresponding  cofactor for the 1 jth term. So, let us  16:49maybe write this expression down  explicitly. So, what does this mean?  16:54This means that the determinant of so for a  4 by 4 matrix so a 1 1 times determinant of  17:03whatever you get after dropping the first row and  the first column so a 2 2, a 2 2, a 2 3, a 2 4,  17:14a 3 2, a 3 3, a 3 4 and then a  17:234 2, a 4 3, a 4 4, that is your first expression,  the first term in this sum and then minus  17:35a 1 2 and I will maybe write one more term there  should be a determinant here determinant of so now  17:45we drop the first row and the second column. So, now we get a 2 1, a 2 3, a 2 4, a 3 1,  17:58a 3 3, a 3 4 and then a 4 1, a 4 3, a 4 4.  That is the second term in this expression  18:09and note we have a minus sign here and then  plus a 1 3 and I hope now you can write down  18:14these two determinants. So, check out what this  is and then minus a 1 4 times determinant of  18:23whatever we get here. So, check these two  terms see if you can write down these two terms  18:28that will mean you have  understood what is going on.  18:30So, what is the point here? The point is we  could write the determinant of a we defined it  18:36this is a 4 by 4 matrix in terms of  determinants for 3 by 3 matrices. So,  18:43in other words if I know how to define the  determinant for a matrix of smaller size then  18:48I can sort of use this process inductively and  generalize and that is exactly what we do.  18:54So, here is the inductive definition of the  determinant. So, suppose you have a matrix of size  18:59n by n and we know how to define determinants for  size n minus 1, so n minus 1 by n minus 1 matrices  19:06we know how to define the determinant. So, then  we will define miners and cofactors as before,  19:14so what does that mean? The ij-th minor is the  determinant of the sub matrix formed by deleting  19:18the ith row in the jth column. So, we delete  the ith row and the jth column we get a matrix  19:24of size n minus 1 by n minus 1 and we look at its  determinant that is called the ij-th minor.  19:32This makes sense because we have assumed that we  know how to define matrices, determinants for n  19:38minus 1 by n minus 1 matrices and then if you want  to again we want to do something similar to what  19:46we did earlier, so if you do not want to bother  about signs going ahead you define the ij-th  19:51cofactor as minus 1 to the power i plus j times  the ij-th minor and then we define the determinant  20:01of A as the again this is by expansion along the  first row as minus 1 to the power 1 plus j.  20:08Now the sum runs from 1 through n because  remember there are n entries in the first row,  20:12so minus 1 to the power 1 plus j a 1 j times m 1 j  and again if you do not want to bother about signs  20:20and you just want a simple sum then you absorb  that sign into the minor and you can write it in  20:29terms of cofactor, so summation a 1 j, C 1 j. So, maybe let us write down this expression let me  20:39write down the first term, so now suppose let us  say I have a n by n matrix so this determinant of  20:47A is a 1 1 times determinant of whatever you get  by deleting the first row and the first column.  20:56So, you will get a 2 2, a 2 3 and it will run all  the way till a to n and then below you will have  21:04a 3 2, a 3 3 and all the way up to a three n  and if you complete this you get up go all the  21:11way up to a n n and then the second term is  going to be minus a 1 2 times determinant of  21:20a 1 not a 1, a 2 1, a 2 3. And then you keep going up till a to  21:30n and then you have a 3 1, a 3 3 going up till a  3 n and you keep doing this here you will get the  21:39first column, here you will get the third column  meaning all the entries remaining in third column  21:46and here you will get the nth column and then  you keep going, you have a 1 2, then you have a 1  21:533 times determinant see if you can write down this  term and then minus a 1 4 times some determinant  22:02and note what is happening. These  determinants are of smaller size.  22:06So, now if I want to do this for a 5 by 5 matrix,  I will need to compute of the determinant of a 4  22:12by 4 matrix but I know how to do that, which means  I now know how to compute the determinant of a 5  22:18by 5 matrix but then I can use the same inductive  definition and go for a 6 by 6 matrix and then  22:25using 6 by 6 to 7 by 7 and then so on to 8 by 8  and then using that to 9 by 9 and you can see that  22:33inductively for any number I can do this process.  So, that is the idea of the determinant. So,  22:41this is a very complicated looking definition  and it is kind of a quirk that it is indeed very  22:50useful I in fact I cannot emphasize how useful  you will see it later when we solve equations  22:58and it is used for other things as well  you will see this in calculus too.  23:02So, maybe as an example let us compute the  determinant of the identity matrix of size n.  23:17So, remember the identity matrix had 1 on  the diagonal so and everything else is 0.  23:26So, I am this is shorthand to  say that everything else is 0.  23:32So, let us use the definition, so by definition  this is 1 times determinant of whatever  23:40the 1 1th minor, 1 times the 1 1th minor.  So determinant of you drop the first row  23:47and first column so you get ones on the  diagonal and zeros on the off diagonal.  23:51So, this is again the identity  matrix of size n minus 1 by n minus 1  23:58and then minus 0 times the 1 2th minor but  I do not want I do not really care about  24:07computing it because it is 0 times something  it is going to be 0 anyway plus 0 times the  24:161 3th minor and so on. So, all these terms are  going to be 0 because in the rest of the first  24:21row all the terms you have are 0, so what do you  get, you are left only with 1 times determinant  24:32of the identity matrix of smaller size. So, determinant of In is determinant of  24:43In minus 1 that is what we obtained in by this  process and then I can keep doing this. So,  24:50this is determinant of In minus 2 and so on. So,  the correct way of doing this is what is called  24:54induction and doing this we will reach all  the way down till maybe I3 which in or I2  25:04whichever you prefer and both of these we  computed in the previous video to be 1.  25:09So, let us recall what we have done in this video  we started by defining recalling the definition of  25:15the determinant for the 1 by 1, 2 by 2, and  3 by 3 cases and we saw that for the 4 by 4  25:22matrix we can define the determinant by using  the 3 by 3 definition because we can do that  25:30for the 3 by 3 using the 2 by 2 and for the 2  by 2 using the 1 by 1. So, it follows that for  25:35the 4 by 4 we can use the 3 by 3 definition and  then we generalize this to the n by n matrix,  25:42so we said that if we can define the determinant  for n minus 1 by n minus 1 matrix, then we can  25:48define it for an n by n matrix so, this is called  the inductive definition of the determinant.  25:53And finally, we have computed we did one example  which was we computed that the determinant of  25:59the identity matrix of any size 3 by 3, 4 by 4, 5  by 5, 10 by 10; any n by n is 1, thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.