---
title: "L1.1: Vectors :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L1.1: Vectors :: IITM Online Degree

L1.1: Vectors

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the maths 2 component of  the online BSC program. My name is Sarang Sane,  00:21I will be instructing for this course and  in the beginning of this course we will  00:28study a little bit of linear algebra. So, today is  this first lecture is going to deal with vectors.  00:35So, what are vectors? In the screen  appear we can see some vectors that  00:40you have probably studied in previous course.  So, something with arrows and directions and  00:48so on. So, I am going to tell you a slightly  different story about what vectors are.  00:54So, let us see what are the  contents of this video. So,  00:57in this video we are going to talk about vectors  and data, we are going to talk about why vectors?  01:05We will do some examples. We will do vectors  and visualization, this is sort of on the  01:12same ideas that you saw in the first slide. And  then we look at vectors in the physical context.  01:20So, let us start with vectors and data. So, we often encounter data in a data. This entire  01:27course is supposed to be about data, so we better  start with some data. So, here is an example of  01:34data. So, this is an example I took from the  government website. So, it talks about the  01:40GDP, the Gross Domestic Product of the country  and it breaks it sector wise. So, what was the GDP  01:49from agriculture and industry and mining and so on  and across the years 2000-2001 to 2012-2013?  02:03So, maybe here is another example from our  national passion. So, this is the team-wise  02:10batting average for some players where one of  them was a player when I made these slides,  02:15but unfortunately no longer is so I will have  to say ex-player, ex team India player. Anyway,  02:22so this is Virat Kohli, Dhoni, Rohit  Sharma, K.L. Rahul and Shikar Dhawan  02:28and the teams are Australia, England, New  Zealand, South Africa, Sri Lanka and Pakistan  02:34and in the table we see for each  team the average for each player.  02:42So, these are two examples of data.  As you can see the data is arranged in  02:47a table and this is typically how we get data  and often the things we are interested in  02:55are about a row or a column or some rows  or some columns. So, this is exactly where  03:02the idea of a vector stems from. So, what is a vector? A vector can be  03:09thought of as a list. So, in the context of the  above examples, vectors could be columns or they  03:15could be rows. So, here is an example from the GDP  table. So, this is a row corresponding 2010-11.  03:23So, the total GDP and then the sector-wise  GDPs, these are all in crores by the way.  03:31Or here is an example from the cricket  table. So, this is the batting averages of  03:38the players that we saw, Kohli, Dhoni, Rohit  Sharma, etcetera with respect to South Africa  03:48or we could pull out a column  from let us say the GDP table.  03:52So, this is the GDP, the full GDP so across  the years 2000-2001 to I think it was 2012-13.  04:08And then here is a column maybe the averages for  Virat Kohli with respect to the various teams. So,  04:19South Africa and then New Zealand and  England and so on, Australia and so on.  04:25So, these are all examples of vectors. So,  when I say vectors of course, you have to  04:29drop the heading in these rows or columns. So, the vector corresponding to the South Africa  04:35row would be written as a 64.35, 31.92,  33.3, 26 and 49.87. So, this is a vector.  04:52So, this vector has how many components? It  has 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 components. This vector  04:59has 5 components and I am putting commas  in the middle just to represent that this  05:06number is ended and the next one has started,  otherwise we really do not need commas.  05:12Similarly, the vector corresponding to the column  of Virat Kohli s averages, so this is written  05:19again as a column. So, 54.57,  45.3, 59.91, 64.35, 60 and 48.72.  05:38So, this is again a vector. So, this is a,  this is what we will call a column vector  05:49and this is what we will call a row vector.  05:56So, sometimes we are going to study very soon  what are matrices, we can also call these  06:04as a column matrix and we can  think of this as a row matrix.  06:10So, depending on what we want to do, whatever is  convenient, we think of this as a row vector or a  06:18row matrix and similarly as a column vector or  a column matrix. So, the important point here is  06:25what is a vector? A vector is a list, it is a list  of numbers that is what you have to remember.  06:32So, let us go ahead and ask why vectors? So, we  can use vectors to perform arithmetic operations  06:39on lists such as the table columns. So, for  example if we want to average the sectoral  06:45GDP across the years 2000-2001 to 2009-10,  I will take the relevant part of that table.  06:54So, we want 2000-2001 to 2009-10. I see a typo  here, this should be 2000-2001 anyway. So,  07:06we do not want the, we want the average across the  first 10 rows. So, let us first of all strike out  07:13that last row, we do need this and for these  rows what do we want? We want the average.  07:21So, how do I get the average? I add these  numbers. So, if I want the average of the GDP,  07:27that is the total GDP, that is what we have  in the first column. I add these numbers  07:35and then I whatever total I get  07:38I divide by 10. Similarly out here,  what do I do? I add these numbers,  07:46and then I take the total and then I divide by 10.  And what does that give me? That gives me the GDP  07:54contribution of Agriculture and Allied Services  across the years 2000-2001 to 2009-10.  08:04And then similarly I can for each of  these I can add the corresponding entries  08:11and then I can divide by 10. Those will give  me the averages. So, I can do this for each  08:17column and the idea is that well if you what  is happening, you are repeating each operation  08:23across rows. So, instead of doing this for  08:27each column each entry, what I can say is I  will take this entire row and I will add it  08:33to this entire row and I will add that to this  entire row and I will add all these 10 rows.  08:40So, what do I mean when I say add these rows?  That means I add the corresponding entries, the  08:45corresponding components. So, the first entries  are added, all the second entries are added,  08:50all the third entries are added, all the tenth,  not tenth, seventh entry is added that is the last  08:58corresponding to the last column and then whatever  I get that is the those that will give you me a  09:06vector of totals. So, I will get the total GDP  09:11from 2000 to 2010, total GDP contributed by  Agriculture and Allied areas from 2000 to 2010  09:21and so on. So, I get all these totals. So, I have  7 numbers out here and then I divide each one by  09:2810\. So, I can do that by dividing the entire  row by 10 or the entire row vector by 10.  09:35So, 1 by 10 times this thing that I got and that  is exactly what I get out here. So, the point here  09:44is instead of doing it entry wise, I can think of  it as if I am doing it for lists and that is what  09:52vectors are going to do of us. So, let us move  ahead. We will see more examples and that might  10:01shed more light on what is happening. So, here is another example. So, Arun has to  10:06buy 3 kgs of rice and 2 kgs of dal and Neela  has to buy 5 kgs of rice and 6 kgs of dal.  10:13So, let us put that into a table. So,  this is rice in kgs and dal in kgs and  10:19the corresponding numbers for Arun and Neela. So,  3 kgs of rice for Arun, 5 for Neela and 2 kgs and  10:266 kgs of dal respectively. So, what are the total,  what is the total amount of rice and dal that  10:34they want to get? They want to purchase 8  kgs of rice and 8 kgs of dal in total.  10:40So, again we, how did we get this? We added these  two and we got this, we added these two and we  10:45got this. So, I can think of this instead as we  will think of 3 comma 2 as the vector for Arun.  10:54So, now notice that here if I think of  it like this, this is a column vector,  10:59but instead I have written it over here like a row  vector. It is the same thing depending on what we  11:05want to do. So, here I have written 3 comma 2 as  the row vector, this is the demand for Arun.  11:10So, the first component corresponds to the  demand for rice, Arun s demand for rice. The  11:15second component corresponds to Arun s demand for  dal. And then 5, 6 for Neela. So, again the first  11:22component is Neela s demand for rice, the second  component is how much dal Neela wants to buy.  11:31So, we can add these vectors. How do we  add them? We add them component wise,  11:35exactly the way we have done over here. So,  when I add these, I do 3 plus 5 which is 8  11:41and 2 plus 6 which is 8 and that is how  I get this column vector and instead we  11:47have just written these in terms of rows below.  So, I have written these here in terms of rows.  11:53So, together they want to buy 8 kgs of rice and  8 kgs of dal. These are pretty simple example.  12:03So, here is a slightly more a larger example I  will not say it is more involved. So, this is  12:11examples about stock taking in a grocery shop. So,  in this grocery shop we have 5 items. Let us say,  12:17so we have rice, dal, oil, biscuit packets and  soap bars, and at the start of the day, the  12:26shopkeeper takes stock and finds that they have  150 kgs of rice, 50 kgs of dal, 35 litres of oil,  12:3370 biscuit packets and 25 soap bars in stock. That  is what they have in the beginning of the day.  12:40So, maybe in the first hour, there  are 3 customers, so, buyer A purchases  12:48whatever as per this column. So, this  is the column corresponding to buyer A  12:57and then buyer B purchases according to this  column. So, 12 kgs of rice, 5 kgs of dal,  13:027 litres of oil, 10 biscuit  packets and 2 soap bars  13:06and then similarly buyer C purchases 3 kgs  of rice, 2 kgs of dal, 5 litres of oil,  13:125 biscuit packets and 1 soap bar. And after sometime, after that one hour  13:18has lapsed, this stock for that days arise,  the new stock and that new stock 100 kgs of  13:26rice arrives, 75 kgs of dal, 30 litres of oil,  80 biscuit packets and 30 soap bars, this is  13:33what arrives. So, now the question is after that  one hour, how much is in stock? What is the new  13:42thing in stock? So, how do we do this?  So, the way to do this of course is we  13:52see how much stock we had  at the start of the day.  13:54So, let us look at rice. So, we had 150 kgs of  rice, and then this is how much went out for  13:59buyer A, this is how much went out for B, this  is how much went out for buyer C and then this  14:05what came in. So, 150 minus 8 minus 12 minus  3 plus 100. So, this is how much rice is left  14:14at the end of one hour. This is how much is in  stock. And similarly for dal, we will do the same  14:19thing and then oil, this is how much went out,  this is how much came in, again this is how much,  14:29how many biscuit packets went out and 80 biscuit  packets came in and then finally for soap bars,  14:38we had 25 to start with and then 4 and 2  and 1 were sold and then 30 new ones arrived  14:47after 1 hour. So, you can see that  14:51instead of doing it this way, we can  think of this in terms of vectors. So,  14:55in vector representation how would we do  this? You would write down the vectors for  15:03each of those columns. So, we have 150, 50, 35,  70, 25 which was in stock at the start of the day  15:13and then we have plus minus 8 minus  8 minus 4 minus 10 minus 4. Notice  15:20that now we have put in a minus sign which  was not in the table so, that is because  15:27in vector notation now, we can keep track of  what is being bought in, what is being sold.  15:42So, the minus corresponds to whatever is sold and  the plus which is down here corresponds to the new  15:52stock which has arrived. So, that is stock which  the shopkeeper has brought from retailer. So,  16:01this is something that was not there  in the table. This is something that we  16:04created. So, you can see that the vector has  some value. So, this is minus 8 minus 8 minus 4  16:12minus 10 minus 4 corresponding to customer A and  then the column for customer B has become this  16:19row, minus 12 minus 5 and so on. And the column for customer C has become  16:26this row, minus 3, this row  vector, minus 3 minus 2 and so on  16:30and the new arrived stock, the fresh stock is  this final vector plus 100, 75, 30, 80, 30.  16:41And this is without a minus sign as I said  that is because this is being added to the  16:46stock, the existing stock. So, this is how  you would take stock in a grocery store. So,  16:57so I will again reiterate that addition is in  terms of how we in term is component wise.  17:05So, we add corresponding entries of the vectors.  So, over here if I wanted to add, then I would  17:13get a vector, row vector at the end and the first  component of that row vector would be 150 minus 8  17:20minus 12 minus 3 plus 100. So, that is a 150 minus  23, so that is 127 plus 100, so that would be  17:30227 and you can do the rest. The last entry let  us calculate that. So, you would have the last  17:38entry that would and 25 minus 4 minus 2 minus 1,  so 25 minus 7 that is 18 and then plus 30, so 48.  17:48So, I hope you understand how to add vectors.  This is an example of addition of vectors.  17:54So, we can do one more thing.  So, in the same example  18:00suppose buyer A comes the next day and they buy  the same items that they bought the previous  18:05day. So, then we can add the vector two times  or we can multiply each entry of the vector  18:15by 2. So, addition we learnt in the previous  example, so if we want to see how much total  18:26items have been bought by the buyer across  the two days, so then we would have 8, 8,  18:344, 10, 4 plus 8, 8, 4, 10, 4. This is  a vector corresponding to buyer A.  18:38So, this was a column corresponding to buyer  A which we have written as a row vector.  18:43And so we can say that so we add this addition as  component wise, coordinate wise, so we get 16, 16,  18:508, 28, so, what this says is that buyer A  bought 16 kgs of rice, 16 kgs of dal and  18:57whatever else. And the same  thing can be written as,  19:02so we can think of this as 2 times  8, 2 times 8, 2 times 4, 2 times 10,  19:12and 2 times 8. So, we are adding this  twice. So, each entry gets multiplied by 2.  19:21And then what we can do is we can take this 2  out. So, this is called scalar multiplication.  19:29So, multiplying a vector is by a scalar  so maybe here we should have by a scalar.  19:44So, that is what the slide says by a  scalar is called scalar multiplication. So,  19:49that means if you have C times some vector  let us say the entries of that vector are  19:56v1 v2 vn., then scalar multiplication will  be will mean that this is the same as the  20:06vectors c times v2 c times v3 upto c times vn;  exactly as we had in this example upstairs.  20:17So, let us talk about visualization  of vectors. Maybe this is something  20:22some of you have possibly seen before.  20:28So, in R2, so let us start with R2, so in  R2 we have points which come with bracket  20:38and two numbers with a comma in the middle. So,  the point a b, so we can instead think of this as  20:43the vector a b. A vector is just a list after  all and the notation is that you put brackets  20:50and you have two numbers and a comma in the  middle if it is in, if it has two coordinates.  20:56So, we can instead think of this as the  vector a comma b. So, this is the list  21:02and this is going to be identified with the vector  ai plus bj. So, if you have seen this notation  21:12before you will certainly know what this means.  If you have not i and j correspond to the unit,  21:28so I maybe I should not use vectors, so  it is an arrow on the x axis from 0,0  21:34to 1,0 and j corresponds to  an arrow on the x, y axis f,  21:410,0 to 0,1. So, maybe here is a picture, so what is  21:47i and j over here? So, I is this, this  is i that i over there and this is j.  22:03And ai plus bj means you scale i by a so a  times i will mean you take a on the x axis  22:12and b times j will mean you take b on the,  22:16b times j on the y axis. So, 0 comma  b and then when you add them you get  22:22we think of that as a arrow from the origin to  the point a comma b. So, here we have these 3  22:31ways of thinking. We can think of this point as  1 comma 2 or we can consider this arrow which is  22:38a line drawn from 0, 0, the origin to the  point 1 comma 2 with the arrow head at  22:46the tip of that arrow is at 1 comma 2. And we can also write this as  22:53i plus 2 times j. Similarly, here we have  minus 1 comma minus 1, so that is your point  23:02and if you think of it as a vector in R2 in the  traditional sense, you draw a line from arrow  23:11from 0, 0 to minus 1 comma minus 1 with the tip  at minus 1 comma minus 1. And we can also think  23:19of this as minus i minus j. Certainly, this is  how you will do it for example in physics.  23:30So, what do I want to point out over here,  what I want to point out here is that  23:37the list that we have we are thinking of  are nothing very different from vectors  23:44in the sense we may have seen  before. So, that is in R2.  23:49So, let us also quickly see something special  about R2 namely, how do we add two vectors  23:55in R2. So, we can add two vectors by joining  them head to tail or by the parallelogram law.  24:01So, what does that mean? So, here are two  vectors v and w. So, we have drawn them  24:09with from the origin to some  point and then if we want to  24:18add them, what you can do is you can  either move w. So, you can move w from its  24:26starting point at 0, 0. Instead  you start it at the tip of v.  24:31Or you can move v to start at the tip of  w but you have to move it paralleley.  24:36Remember that you cannot change the direction. So,  you have to move it paralleley. When we say move,  24:42we mean move paralleley. And then what is v plus  w? v plus w is exactly the vector that you obtain  24:51by drawing a arrow from the origin  to the point that you obtain  24:56by completing this parallelogram. So, you could do  it in either way. Maybe let us do an example here.  25:10So, we could think of the x  y plane and maybe let us do,  25:26so let us say this is 1,1;  this is my v, my path this is  25:362, 1 and this is 1, 2 and now  when I add them what do I do?  25:42I move the tip of the arrow or the  starting point of the arrow 1 comma 2  25:53to over here. And then you can see how much, where  it starts and where it ends and if you do that,  26:03you will see that this is the point 3  comma 3 and this is exactly how we defined  26:11vector addition. So, 1 comma 2 plus 2 comma 1  is 3 comma 3. This was how we defined addition  26:20when we thought of them as lists and this indeed  corresponds to how we add them when we do it in  26:28the traditional way we may have learnt in physics.  So, this is using the parallelogram law.  26:36So, now let us talks about vectors in Rn and you  will see why we insist on lists. So, vectors in  26:43Rn are lists that is rows or columns with n real  entries. So, n entries from the real number, so n  26:52numbers. And now you cannot really think of this  in terms of arrows and geometry. We have to think  27:01of this as abstract entities as just lists. And  so vectors with n entries which is what we studied  27:14previously is the same as vectors in Rn. So, what I mean is vectors in Rn in this sense  27:20and vectors in Rn as we know we can look at so  you start from, you think of them as 0 and then  27:28you end at some point, then you can  think of them as points in Rn. So,  27:33a vector in Rn is just a list and points in Rn  are also you can think of them as just lists.  27:41So, this is nothing very special happening.  The difference is usually when we take points,  27:47we think of it as a set, so there is no  concept of addition, whereas when you think  27:52of them as a vector, we think of addition  or we think of scaling that vector and so  27:57on. We have no concept of scaling a point. That is why we want to differentiate between  28:02points vectors. But just as entities, they are  the same, they are just lists. So, in that sense  28:10there is nothing different in  terms of representation.  28:15So, in the physical context, typically we see  this statement in textbooks, so a vector has  28:23magnitude and direction. So, magnitude is supposed  to represent size and the length of the line shows  28:30its magnitude and the arrow head points in  the direction. So, for example here are two  28:35vectors v and w. So, note here that there is no  axis given. So, if you assume that this is the  28:41axis and then this is a vector starting at 0,0 and  ending at some point and we can say that this is,  28:48this vector is a relatively long vector. So, it has more magnitude, the vector v has more  28:55magnitude than the vector w so it is longer and it  points approximately in the north east direction,  29:06the vector w has relatively shorter magnitude  and it is, it points in the north west direction.  29:13So, again this depends on where on where you  draw the axis and on. So, we cannot really,  29:18directions and so on depends on the axis. So, we  cannot really say much unless we know the axis,  29:28but there was somethings that we can say. If we know the axis, then we can talk about  29:32direction and even if we do not know  the axis, we can talk about the length  29:37that is something universal. And we can talk about  direction in the sense that given two vectors  29:43we can talk about relatively what their, where  they are pointing. So, in other words what is  29:51the angle between them? So, that is, but usually  I mean when study this in physics for the first  30:00time, we do think of this in terms of axis. So, here is maybe an example maybe from  30:09real life. So, a plane is flying towards the  north and wind is blowing from the north west.  30:17So, v is the velocity of the flight and w is  the velocity of the wind and then you want  30:22to calculate what is the trajectory taken by the  plane or in which direction is the net velocity.  30:29So, that will tell you the approximate  direction of movement of the plane.  30:34So, to do that you would have to do the sum. So, v  plus w is the direction in which the plane moves.  30:53So, as we can see vectors are quite useful  in physics to determine things like this,  30:59so trajectories and so on. So, here are some examples from  31:07physics. So, for example, velocity which  we saw in the last slide or acceleration  31:14or force. So, what is important about these  is that these are vector quantities meaning  31:20the direction is very important, it is  not only whether the force is large or  31:24small or the acceleration is large or small,  it also depends on the direction of the force  31:29or the direction of the acceleration. That will  tell you the movement, something about movement.  31:36So, that is why these are vectors. So, we have seen things like this maybe in physics  31:45or you may not have in which  case what I want to say next is  31:49may not be of much use. So, what I want to say  next is for this course do not keep this intuition  31:57in mind, this is not the intuition in mind. What  do we want to do in this course? We want to study  32:02vectors in the context of data. Remember  that is what we started with.  32:06So, data is going to typically come out of tables  or things like that and so your vectors are  32:11typically going to be lists. So, this intuition of  geometry should be kept in your mind, but when you  32:22actually the algebra, think of them as lists and  the addition and scalar multiplication is exactly  32:29done the way we have described, addition is  coordinate wise or entry wise and similarly scalar  32:36multiplication is coordinate or entry wise. So, these are brute force algebra algebraic  32:43operations and that is how we should remember  them. So, in particular I would say the ijk is  32:51may be not something you want to think of at least  for the linear algebra part of this course. So,  32:56do not think of that for vectors. Of course, when  we do calculus, which we will do towards the end,  33:02we will naturally introduce coordinates and so  on. So, there we may come across ijk and so on  33:09where vectors will be useful. So, ijk etcetera  are useful for vectors, but vectors we should  33:17think of as lists. So, with that I hope you have  some feeling for vectors in this video. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.