---
title: "L10.3: Finding the tangent hyper(plane) :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L10.3: Finding the tangent hyper(plane) :: IITM Online Degree

L10.3: Finding the tangent hyper(plane)

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the maths 2 component  of the online B.Sc. program on data science  00:18and programming. This video we are going to talk  about how to find the tangent hyper plane. So,  00:24I will explain what this means in a few  slides, but in terms of R3, meaning if you  00:30have a function of two variables, you can just  think of this as finding the tangent plane.  00:35Let us recall first, we talked about  tangent lines in a previous video.  00:40So, suppose you have a function  of two variables x comma y,  00:43then we have talked about the notion of tangent  lines. So, the notion of a tangent line was, you  00:48take a line L passing through this point a tilde  which is, which you can think of as a comma b and  00:58you restrict your graph to only the plane  above that line. So, once you do that,  01:04it becomes a function of one variable.  And then for a function of one variable,  01:08we know exactly what it means for a tangent  line to exist and how to write it down  01:14in terms of its algebraic equation. And in the previous video, we did exactly that.  01:19So, if u is a unit vector in the direction of  the line L, then the tangent, if it exists,  01:24will be the line slope fu of a tilde passing  through the point a tilde comma f of a tilde. And  01:29so its parametric equation is given by, so xt is a  plus t times u1, yt is b plus t times u2 and zt is  01:44f of a comma b plus t times fu of a comma b, where  what are all the terms here. So, u is u1 comma u2.  01:57So, the vector u is u1 comma u2. That is the  unit vector in the direction of the line L,  02:06a tilde is the coordinates of a tide  are a comma b in two dimensions.  02:12So, if you want to think of it  in R3, it is a comma b comma 0.  02:16And then fu of a comma b is  the directional derivative of  02:20f in the direction u or in the direction of  the unit vector u at the point a comma b. So,  02:26this explains everything. And as you vary t, t  is a variable, as you vary t, you get different  02:32points on this line. So, this was how the  parametric equation was for the tangent line.  02:40So, let us look at the collection of all the  tangents. So, suppose f of x, y is a function  02:46defined in the domain D in R2 containing some  open ball around the point a comma b. Suppose  02:51the gradient f exists and is continuous on some  open ball around the point a comma b, then all  02:57the tangent lines at the point a comma b exists.  This was because once the gradient is continuous  03:04in a small neighborhood in an open ball, then  we know that the directional derivatives all  03:09exist. And once the directional derivatives  all exist, all the tangent lines exist.  03:14So, then we can write down the equation of the  tangent line in the direction of the vector u as,  03:20which means we can, we are saying we can  rewrite it. So, here, what we are saying is  03:27that I can rewrite fu of a comma b as gradient  of f at a comma b dot with the vector u.  03:39In other words, I can rewrite this as  del f del x at a comma b times u1 plus  03:46del f del y at a comma b times u2. So, now I can rewrite the  04:01parametric equations as xt is a  plus u1t, yt is b plus u2t and zt is  04:16f of a comma b plus, now  here something has changed,  04:22because we had fu of a comma b times t, but  I know that fu of a comma b is I can rewrite.  04:31So, what I get is, this is f of a comma  b plus del f del x a comma b times u1  04:53plus del f del y a comma b times  u2 the whole thing times t.  05:05This is how the new equation looks like. And so what we are saying you really is that  05:14somehow, if I know u1 and u2, this is actually a  very easy equation in terms of u1 and u2 provided  05:25I know what are my partial derivatives. So, now  this is how the parametric equations are for the  05:32tangent line in the direction of the unit vector  u. So, now notice something interesting here. So,  05:38if I look at zt, I can really write it as a linear  combination of xt and yt. How do I do that?  05:47Well, with some constants, of  course, so if I take zt minus  05:52f of a comma b, so this is a partial  derivative of f with respect to x at a, b,  06:00times x minus a plus partial derivative of f with  respect to y at a comma b times y minus b. So,  06:11it satisfies this equation. I would write  xt and yt. So, this parametric equation  06:26satisfies this particular equation, which means  that all of these lines are contained in this,  06:38whatever this shape is which  06:42satisfies this equation. So, let us  look at some examples in GeoGebra.  06:46So, here is the function x, y. This is how  the graph looks like. We have seen this  06:50function before. Let us look at what  happens to the point 1 comma 1. So,  06:54if you look at the point 1 comma 1, let us take a  plane passing through that point. So, this is how  06:58a plane passing through the point 1 comma 1 looks  like. And we can vary this plane. So, if you vary  07:10this unit vector, accordingly,  the plane is going to vary.  07:14So, these are many of the planes  passing through that point.  07:19And now, let us restrict  the function to that plane.  07:23So, if we do that, we get this curve. So, this  is the graph. Let us remove this f of x is  07:31x times y. This is how the graph looks  like. Let us draw the tangent to that graph.  07:39So, here is how the tangent line looks like.  Now, let us see what happens as we vary  07:49this plane. So, if we vary this plane, this  is how the graph changes. Let us look at that  07:56equation that we just had, which was z minus f of  a, b is del f del x at a comma b times x minus a  08:08plus del f del y at a comma b times y  minus b, so how does that look like? So,  08:20here is that plane. And what we are saying is that,  08:27let us remove this plane in which we are  cutting. So, what we are saying is that this line  08:34lies on this plane. So, I am  going to keep the plane like this.  08:38And now let us again vary the tangent lines, if  you vary the tangent lines, here us what happens.  08:46So, something interesting is  happening. All these tangent lines  08:50are in fact lying on that plane. You can see  they are not moving away from the plane.  08:54So, if I change the perspective, you can  see that they are all on that same plane,  09:00and which we have seen algebraically. So  I am making that, so that we are viewing  09:07that plane like this. And you can see that  the line is consistently on that plane.  09:12And here is how the line looks like. So, on that  payment varies, but it remains on that plane.  09:18So, let us do another example.  09:27So, let us look at the function sine of  x, y. So, here is how that function looks  09:32like again. Let us take the point 1  comma 0 and ask what happens to the  09:41tangents at that point. So, let us  draw a plane through that point. So,  09:46here is a plane passing through that point.  So, let us see what happens to the curve over  09:51there. So, here us the curve. So, again, these are  pictures we have seen earlier. Let me remove the  10:00graph. So, as I change my  10:03plane, the curve changes. So, here is how that  looks like. And now let us see what happens  10:08to the tangent. Let me draw the tangent here.  Here is the tangent. So, again, the tangent is  10:15changing. So, if we draw that plane that we just  had or rather the solution of the equation that  10:21we just had, here is the plane that we get and we  see that this tangent line is on that plane.  10:26And if we change our line, which  is the unit vector, here is how the  10:38tangent changes. But you can see it  is always on this plane. So, if I  10:42play it like this, you can see it is always on  the plane. It never leaves that plane. And again,  10:49this is something we have proved algebraically.  So, this is just a demonstration to say that  10:59all of these tangent lines lie on a  particular plane. And which plane is  11:05that that is exactly the equation of the  plane that we have written down here.  11:09So, let us look at the tangent lines in terms  of linear algebra. So, what one means by this is  11:18that we can view them as affine  flats. This is an idea that we  11:21saw in the previous video as well. So,  in terms of affine flats, x t, y t, z t  11:33is a comma b comma f of ab. This is the equation.  So, here I will get the affine flat plus t times  11:50the vector u1, u2, fu of a comma b.  11:57So, where is the affine flat coming from?  So, the collection of these points is,  12:03if I call that the tangent line, so this is  the tangent line to f at a, b in the direction  12:20of u. This line as an affine flat is given  by this point a comma b comma f of a, b  12:29plus the line passing through the origin,  12:36so the subspace, which may be I will call  W, and what is this W. So, W is the line  12:48passing through the vector  12:56u1, u2, fu of a comma b.  13:00So, of course, we know that if you  have a line passing through a vector,  13:04then such a line, any vector on that is a scalar  multiple of this vector. And as a result of that,  13:16W will be given by t times u1 comma u2 comma  fu of a comma b. So, this is how it looks like  13:22as an affine flat. And the point one is  trying to make here is that according to  13:33how u varies this W vary. So, I will write  this to emphasize that it depends on u.  13:42And the vector u has an interesting property,  namely, this is the property that we exploited  13:46in the previous slide as well. So,  because fu of a comma b is equal to  13:53u1 times del f del x a, b plus u2 times del f del  y a comma b, what we can see is that the lines  14:11Wu all lie on the plane Z is equal  to del f del x a comma b times  14:29x plus del f del y a comma b times y. So,  this is the plane on which they lie.  14:41And now we can translate this plane to pass  through the point a comma b comma f of a comma b.  14:48So, if I call this plane, let us say, P. So,  this is again a subspace of R3. And now I will  14:58translate this by a comma b comma f of a, b  to get another plane which I am going to call  15:08the tangent plane of f at a comma b, this  is a comma b comma f of a comma b plus  15:33the plane P. So,  15:36the net upshot of what I am saying is that, if  you take the collection of all tangent lines,  15:43they lie on the particular plane. How do I get  that plane, either by direct observation as we did  15:50in the previous slide, or else, you see that all  these tangent lines are affine flats that means  16:01they are lines which have been moved from  16:06a line passing through the origin by this  vector. You take all those lines.  16:11And then you can see this very easy  relation that that you are getting here.  16:17And then exploiting that relation, you can  move it back to the point that you wanted  16:21to pass through. And so all these will pass  through that line, whichever way you want,  16:26you will get that the tangent plane of f at  a comma b is an affine flat of this form.  16:33So, the net result is the following. If f of x,  y is a function defined in the domain D in R2  16:37containing some open ball around the point a comma  b, suppose the gradient exists and is continuous  16:44on an open ball, then the equation of the  tangent plane to f at a comma b is given by  16:49z is equal to f of a comma b plus del f del x  16:56at a comma b times x minus a plus del f del y at a  comma b times y minus b. So, this is the question  17:10that of the tangent plane to f at a comma b.  17:15So, this is indeed an affine flat  because you have one linear equation. And  17:22but the equation, so you are looking for solutions  of basically what we are saying is in terms of  17:28linear algebra, you are looking for solutions of  del f del x a comma b times x plus del f del y  17:40a comma b times y minus z is equal to del f del x  a comma b times a plus del f del y a comma b times  17:55b. And this is an equation in three variables.  So, we know how solutions of this look like.  18:03So, if it has even one solution, then it is  basically you take that solution and translate  18:08the null space for this, meaning if you have 0 on  the right hand side, you translate that null space  18:17by that solution. This is what we did in terms  of linear algebra. That is how we get the tangent  18:22plane. So, whether the linear algebra aspect  here is clear or not, what we are saying is  18:28this is the equation of the tangent plane  and we have an interpretation in terms of  18:32what we have done in linear algebra. Let us do some examples to set ideas. So,  18:38here is f of x, y is x plus y, what is  the tangent plane that 1 comma 1. So,  18:45here we computed the gradient. So, the  gradient at 1 comma 1 was just 1 comma 1  18:55and so we can write down that z is equal to f of  1 comma 1, which is 2 plus 1. So, this 1 is coming  19:04from the first part here. So, 1 times x minus a,  which is again 1 plus 1 times y minus b, so b is  19:14again 1, and this 1 here is coming from the one  in the second coordinate of the gradient.  19:20So, this is an easy equation. So,  this is saying that z is equal to  19:252 plus x minus 1 plus y minus  1. In other words, this is 2.  19:33So, this is just x plus y. So, the equation  of the tangent plane at 1 comma 1 is given by  19:43z is equal to x plus y. So, let us do f of x, y  is x times y. So, here we computed the gradient  19:53at 1 comma 1. And again, this gradient was 1 comma  1. So, here we get z is equal to f of 1 comma 1,  20:04which is 1 plus 1 times x minus 1 plus 1  times y minus 1. So, if you evaluate that,  20:11we are going to get x plus y minus 1. So,  here the tangent plane is x plus y minus 1.  20:19And finally, let us do f of x, y, sine x, y, let  us maybe compute the tangent plane at 1 comma 0.  20:26So, the gradient at 1 comma 0 is given by  0 comma 1. This is a computation we have  20:38done earlier. And so the equation of the tangent  plane is z is equal to f of 1 comma 0, which is 0,  20:48plus 0 times x minus 1 plus  20:561 times y minus 0, which is just z is  equal to y. So, the equation of the  21:03tangent plane is z is equal to y. So, I hope  the, finding out the equations is really easy,  21:11because you have a formula and you can just  substitute all the values in the formula.  21:16Let us now talk about tangent hyperplanes.  So, if you do the same thing in n dimensions,  21:21unfortunately, what you get is not a plane, but  it is, as we said, it is an affine flat, which is,  21:27for which the corresponding subspace is  something which is the solution space of,  21:38for single equation. So, if you do that, that  means you are going to get an affine flat  21:45of dimension n the solution space will be n  dimensional. So, let us go through that.  21:52So, if f of x tilde be a function defined  domain D in Rn containing some ball around  21:57the point a tilde, suppose the gradient exists  and is continuous on some open ball around the  22:01point a tilde. So, we can do the same things that  we have done earlier and get the equation. So,  22:08for that, let us recall what is the  equation of, the parametric equation  22:14of the tangent lines. So, in the direction  of the vector u, we could write this down as  22:23the point, so a tilde comma f of a tilde plus t  times u comma fu of a tilde. This was how we wrote  22:32it down in terms of the vector form. So, notice that this part of the  22:40equation satisfies the following identity that  the last coordinate which, if we call it z, last  22:49coordinate satisfies that z is equal to summation  ui times or rather the ith coordinate xi times  23:02gradient fi with respect to xi at a tilde  times this is what it satisfies, because  23:13fu of a tilde is, what is fu of a tilde,  so just to emphasize, so this part.  23:29So, what is fu of a tilde, just to emphasize this  part is equal to submission ui times ingredient f,  23:39del f del xi at a tilde. And these uis are exactly what  23:44come in the first n coordinates. So, that means  the n plus 1th coordinate which we called z  23:51is summation xi times del f del xi at a tilde.  So, what that means is that each of these lines,  24:00so the lines which are translates  of the tangent lines to the origin,  24:07which is the corresponding subspace, one  dimension subspace, all of them lie on the,  24:15they are solutions of this equation. So, if you have one equation  24:19that means you get a hyperplane that is  exactly what is called a hyperplane. So,  24:23this is the null space of the single equation. It  is an n dimensional subspace in Rn plus 1. And so,  24:31it is a hyperplane in Rn plus 1. So, it  is of dimension in. And these lines all  24:36lie on that hyperplane. And now, if you take  that hyperplane and shift it by this point,  24:45then you get the corresponding affine flat. And that means that all the tangent lines lie  24:50on that affine flat or that hyperplane  and so that is the tangent hyperplane of  24:57corresponding to the function f at the point a  tilde. And so its equation is going to be given by  25:03shifting this z summation xi del f del xi of  a tilde by this point. So, if you do that,  25:10we will get the equation of the tangent  hyperplane to f at a tilde is given by  25:18z is equal to f of a tilde plus summation del  f del xi at a tilde times xi minus ai. This  25:33is how it will look like. Or you  can write this better in terms of  25:41the dot product. So, this is gradient of f at  a tilde, so now this is a vector and you dot  25:45this vector with x tilde minus a tilde. So, let us do some examples to set these  25:52ideas. So, if you have f of x, y, z is xy plus  yz plus zx let us look at the tangent hyperplane  25:59at 1 comma 1 comma 1, so for this, I  need to first compute the gradient. So,  26:04the gradient at x comma y comma z, well we  know what this is, this is x plus y, y plus z,  26:11z plus x. So, if you compute this at 1 comma  1 comma 1, this is 2 comma 2 comma 2.  26:21And now, if we use this, what we will  get is that the tangent hyperplane is  26:36z is equal to f of 1 comma 1 comma 1 plus this  gradient at 1 comma 1 comma 1 dot with x minus  26:481, y minus 1, z minus 1. So, if you work that  out, that is f of 1, 1, 1 is 3, so 3 plus  27:002 comma 2 comma 2 dot with x minus 1, y minus  1, z minus 1, so I should not use said here.  27:09So, since I am using, so let me use some other  variable u. So, that means, so the equation is  27:24u is equal to 3 plus 2 times x minus 1 plus  2 times y minus 1 plus 2 times z minus 1.  27:34Similarly, if you have x square  plus y square plus x square,  27:38so let us look at the gradient it is  going to be given by 2x comma 2y comma  27:452z. So, if you compute it at the point 2, 3  minus 1 it will be 4 comma 6 comma minus 2.  27:56And so the equation of the tangent hyperplane  is u is equal to f of 2, 3, minus 1  28:05plus gradient at 2, 3 minus 1 dot with x  minus 2 comma y minus 3 comma z plus 1.  28:21So, the function value is 2 square 4 plus 3  square, so 4 plus 9, 13 plus 1, so 14 plus  28:324 comma 6 comma minus 2 dot  with x minus 2 comma y minus  28:383 comma z plus 1. And if we  evaluate what that is, we will get,  28:52so the equation is u is equal to 14 plus 4 times  x minus 2 plus 6 times y minus 3 plus or minus  29:092 times z plus 1. So, the computation is quite  clear. The reason may be a little bit involved.  29:21But I hope I have convinced you that at  least using the pictures that indeed,  29:25all of these do lie on a plane in, when  you are in two dimensions or hyperplane  29:30when you are in higher dimensions. So, once again, same question, tangent planes need  29:37not always exist. So, why is that, because the  tangent lines themselves do not exist in both of  29:43these cases. So, we have seen this in the previous  video where we had xy by x square plus y square.  29:49There is no tangent lines in the directions other  than the x and the y axis, positive and negative.  29:59And for f of xy is mod x plus mod y, it is  even worse. I will encourage you again to check  30:05what happens. So, you have to be careful. And the hypothesis that the gradient is continuous  30:12in the neighborhood is very, very important. And  that often happens for polynomials or even for  30:18rational functions or other kinds of functions  where it is easy to check for continuity.  30:26Even for this function, f of x, y is xy by x  square plus y square if x, y is not 0, 0. And  30:30other point is the tangent plane certainly exists.  And I will encourage you to check what that is.  30:38Let me end by with this idea of linear  approximation. So, this is an idea that  30:42we have done in one variable calculus. So, if f of  x tilde is a function defined in a domain D in Rn  30:48containing some open ball around the point  a tilde, suppose gradient of f exists and is  30:52continuous on some open ball around the point  a tilde, then we can take that expression  30:59and create a function out of that.  So, that is a linear function.  31:02So, this is a function Lf of x tilde is f of a  tilde plus gradient of a tilde dot with x tilde  31:08minus a tilde. This is exactly what we, so the  right hand side is exactly what we saw was the  31:14expression coming in the equation of the tangent  plane, on the left, instead, we had z or u,  31:24meaning the n plus oneth variable. So, then instead of that we will create a function  31:32and so this function is the best  linear approximation for the function f  31:36close to a tilde. This is exactly the  idea of the tangent in the first place.  31:40For functions of one variable, if you have a  curve, meaning the graph, it approximates the  31:45graph. For functions of several variables,  for example, for two variables, if you have  31:52the graph of that function, the plane is going  to approximate that graph close to the point.  31:59Let us do a couple of examples again. And this  involves the same checking that we have done  32:03before. So, if you have f of x, y is xy at 1, 1,  what is the linear approximation? Well, same idea,  32:11you have to compute the gradient at 1 comma 1.  So, what is the gradient of this function? So,  32:17it is y comma x with the gradient of f at 1  comma 1. We have computed is 1 comma 1.  32:23So, what is the linear  approximation, so Lf of x comma y,  32:31so this is at the point 1 comma 1, so I have to  also sort of emphasize that this is the linear  32:38approximation close to 1 comma 1. So, I will  say that. Lf of x comma y is f of 1 comma 1  32:45plus the gradient at 1 comma 1 dot with x  minus 1 comma y minus 1, which is 1 plus  32:571 comma 1 dot with x minus 1 comma y  minus 1, which is 1 plus x minus 1 plus  33:04y minus 1. So, this is x plus y minus 1. So, now we are thinking of this as a function. So,  33:10if you take this function, it  approximates the function x, y.  33:16So, this is the function, which  is the best linear approximation  33:26to f close to the point 1 comma 1. So,  if you change your point, the function  33:34will change, the linear function will change. Let us do the same thing for in three variables.  33:42So, if you have f of x, y, z is x square  plus y square plus x square, well,  33:45we know what is gradient at this point. We  have done couple of slides ago. This was 4, 6  33:53minus 2. So, Lf of x, y, z  33:58this is 3 plus the gradient which is 4, 6,  minus 2 dot with x minus 2, y minus 3, z plus 1,  34:09which is 3 plus 4 times x minus 2 plus 6  times y minus 3 minus 2 times z plus 1.  34:19If you rewrite this, this is 4x plus 6y  minus 2z and then 3, minus 8 minus 18 plus,  34:36minus 2, so minus 18 minus 2, minus 20,  34:41so minus 32 and then so this is minus 29. So, I  hope the numbers are correct. You can check. So,  34:48this is, what is this? This is  the best linear approximation to  34:56f close to this point 2, 3, minus 1. So, let us quickly summarize what we have  35:06done so far in this video. We have seen that  the collection of tangent lines lies on a plane  35:11when we have a function of two  dimensions or two variables.  35:17And if it is off several variables  it lies on the hyperplane  35:20and we characterize the, we obtained the equation  of this hyperplane by looking at the corresponding  35:28subspace, which is exactly given by  the solution to a single equation.  35:36So, using that we can explicitly write down  what is the equation of that hyperplane.  35:47And then we also saw that if you take the right  hand side and make that into a function, then that  35:54is the best linear approximation to the function  f at the given point a tilde. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.