---
title: "L10.1: The directional of steepest ascent/descent :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L10.1: The directional of steepest ascent/descent :: IITM Online Degree

L10.1: The directional of steepest ascent/descent

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online BSc Program on Data Science00:18and Programming. This video is about the direction of steepest ascent and descent. So, the ideas00:24in this video will be based on what we have studied about gradients and directional derivatives.00:29So, let us start with this question about how to trace water flowing down the hill.00:36So, maybe we will do this with an example. So, for an electrification project, someone00:42named Mohan Bhargava is trying to understand how water flows down a particular hill, the00:48name may be somewhat familiar. So how does water flow downhill? So, let us ask this question,00:53how does water flow downhill?00:55So, if you think about how it flows downhill it always moves in the direction where the01:01altitude decreases most rapidly. So, if you have a rock face, if you have something like01:09this, it is going to flow down here because this is most rapid. So, just as an example01:16here is the, here is a cross section of the Deccan Plateau around Bangalore and Chennai,01:25and so you can see Bangalore here in the middle, you can see Chennai here at very close to01:30sea level on the right and there is the western ghats on the left, and a little bit of inclination01:41between Bangalore and then a steep downfall towards Chennai.01:44So, just as an example, if you have water, which is somewhere over here it is going to01:50flow down here. If you have water on this side, it will flow down on this side. And01:56let us say if you have water somewhere here it will flow down here, if you have water02:00here it will flow down here, if you are here it flows towards Chennai and so on. So, I02:07think it is clear what we mean by it will move in the direction where the altitude decreases02:11most rapidly.02:12Now, then, of course, one question. So, what happens if you have water somewhere over here?02:19Somewhere exactly at the top. And there it is actually kind of stable. So, if you have02:29gone to mountain tops you might often find that on the top of the mountain it is often02:35like a plateau and there is, often pools of water over there. So, that does not happen.02:40When you have, when you are on the edges. So, which say something about the rate of02:48change, if you think of it carefully about what is happening to the altitude. This picture02:53is just to give a general idea of what will happen to water. Let us come back to the example03:01of our friend Mohan Bhargava.03:03So, what Mohan Bhargava does is, he models the hill similar to the previous picture using03:10a function h of x, where h is the altitude. And then he calculates the derivative h prime03:17x and computes at which points it is negative, positive and 0 and that is exactly what we03:23meant when we said that it moves in the direction in which the altitude decreases most rapidly.03:28So, the decrease in the altitude will be captured by the rate of change of the altitude. And03:36so, that means h prime x is going to tell you what is happening at the point x or to03:42the altitude. And so, if the derivative is negative that means the water flows to the03:46right from that point. So, if we say it is negative that means the the the the tangent03:56line is like this. And if the tangent line is like this, it flows down here, which is04:02to the right.04:03And similarly, if the derivative is positive then the tangent line is like this. So, it04:11flows down here, that is to the left, and if the derivative is 0, then that means the04:17tangent line is like this, and that means the water will remain stationary. And that04:22is exactly what the phenomenon that I was talking about, right at the tip of the mountain04:25at the top. So, this is what Mohan Bhargava tries to do, he tries to model the altitude04:35by this function h of x draws a picture similar to what we had before, although, not for the04:43entire cross section of India, but for that specific hill, and then then based on that04:47he tries to understand how water is flowing down.04:50So, Mohan s friend Gita points out that a one-dimensional model is probably not going04:58to help because the hill is two dimensional, so it has, it is like this and so a one-dimensional05:07picture is not going to help us because there are more than right and left, in real life05:15there are on the ground. That is there are many directions, not just right and left.05:24So, she uses a two-dimensional function h of x comma y to model the altitude h. And05:32here is an example of such a thing. So, you can see something like a hill, and this is05:40the graph of a function and suitable exponential. And so, what she comes up with is a function05:48of this type h of x, y the actual hills have more contours and she models it using that05:54function h of x, y. And based on that she tries to understand how the water is going06:04to flow down.06:05So, Mohan asked her, how she will find out the direction in which the water flows, because06:11now there is more than two directions. So, if you had only a function of one variable06:17h of x then computing the derivative told you in what direction the water is going to06:25move, but now you have several directions. And how do I know now based on this function06:34how the water is going to flow down?06:37So, Gita says the same principle that the water will flow down along the steepest slope,06:46which is when the altitude decreases fastest. So again, the direction in which the altitude06:53decreases fastest. And now, how do we compute this? So now, rather than saying that we should07:01take h prime, we know that if we want to know the rate of change in a particular direction,07:08we have something called the directional derivative.07:10So, she says that, to compute it, we have to find the direction in which the function07:14h decreases fastest, or equivalently, the rate of decrease of h of rate of decrease07:21of h, is fastest. So, this is the same as finding the vector u in which the directional07:27derivative hu is largest in absolute value amongst those for which it has negative sign.07:33So, hu should have negative sign, because we want to decrease, we wanted to decrease07:37h has to decrease fastest, so hu should have negative sign, but amongst those with negative07:43sign, those directions with negative sign, if you take the absolute value, it is the07:48largest.07:49So, in terms of the real line, this will be the value at which hu is smallest in which08:00we include the negative side, so hu must be smallest, that is what we are saying. So that08:06is u such that hu is less than or equal to hv for all v in R2, so that is the smallest08:11value and we also demand that hu is negative, because if it is smallest and positive then08:18that is not going to be of much help. So, this is what we want. So, Gita has now given08:26a different way of doing the same thing, and a more realistic way of doing the same thing.08:30So, now we come to the main point of this video, which is, how do we know that direction?08:36So, now we will generalize this. So, suppose we have a function of n variables and it is08:43defined on a domain D in Rn, containing some open ball around the point a tilde, so we08:47will give a general answer and then we will come back and answer it in this specific question08:52of what direction will the water flow in.08:56So, we want to know with this hypothesis in what direction is the directional derivative09:02minimized? So, suppose gradient f exists and is continuous on some open ball around the09:07point a tilde. So once this happens, we have this wonderful theorem that tells us that09:13if you want to compute fu, then the way to do that is that fu is equal to gradient f09:23at that point a tilde dot with u. So, this is equal to the norm of gradient f at a tilde09:33times the norm at u times cosine of theta. Where what is theta?09:41So, where theta is the angle between the gradient at a tilde and u. We have two vectors, so10:02we have seen this in the linear algebra part that if you have the dot product then that10:06is norm of the first vector times norm of the second vector times cosine of theta, where10:12theta is the angle between those two vectors. Since it is a unit vector we know that norm10:16of u is 1, so this is the same as gradient of f at a tilde times cosine of theta. Now,10:24this function f is fixed, so the gradient is fixed and the gradient at a tilde in particular10:31is fixed and so its norm is fixed.10:33So, as you vary across the different directions what changes is theta. So, this is going to10:40change depending on what is theta. So, as theta changes fu is going to change. So as10:48u changes theta changes, and based on that fu is going to change. So, where is this going10:53to be maximized and where is this going to be minimized?10:56So, now that depends on the values of cosine theta, and cosine theta we understand very,11:00very, very well. So, cosine theta is smallest, so cosine theta is minimized when theta is11:16equal to pi. So, in other words, so if you think of what that means, that means the angle11:26between u and the gradient vector is pi that means they are in opposite directions. If11:31gradient is pointing here then you must be pointing here. So that is u is pointing in11:42the direction opposite to gradient f at a tilde.11:57So, this minimum value therefore, the minimum value of fu is attained when u is equal to12:27minus gradient of f at a tilde by norm, because we always want a factor of u has to be of12:38norm 1. So, u is in the opposite direction means u is minus of the minus of gradient12:44it is in that direction, and then to scale it you have to divide by the norm to make12:49it norm 1.12:51So, the minimum value of fu is attained when u is this and is equal to. So, now you can13:00substitute u to be this. So, if you do that or you can just say that cosine theta is minus13:08of this so it equals minus of norm of gradient of f at a tilde. So, the upshot of this is13:17that in general if you have the directional derivative, the direction in which it is minimized13:24when your function happens to have this property that gradient f exists and is continuous on13:30some ball around a tilde is in the opposite direction to gradient f at a tilde.13:37And so, the unit vector you have to that appears there is minus gradient f because that is13:42the opposite direction divided by its norm, because it has to be norm 1. And when you13:49substitute u to be that, which is the same as taking cosine theta is minus 1 in this13:56expression we will get minus of norm of gradient of f at a tilde.14:00So, now, this answers the question that was originally posed. So, if you had the water14:07flow in the steepest direction downwards, it is going to happen at a gradient of h at14:16the point x comma y minus of that, in the minus of that direction. So, at each point14:25you should take minus gradient of f h at x, y and that will be the direction in which14:29the water moves.14:32So, one can ask the same question about when is it maximized and when is it, when does14:41it remain unchanged. So, based on our previous discussion, we are going to have the same14:47thing happening provided of course, that the hypothesis holds. So, assume the same hypothesis14:51as in the previous slide which means that the gradient exists and is continuous on a14:57open ball around a tilde. So, in that case, we will get there h, sorry fu is going to15:04be gradient of f at a tilde times norm of u, times cosine theta.15:11Now, if you want to maximize this, so it is maximized and cosine theta is maximized. Well,15:22first of all, I can get rid of norm u because it is always norm 1, times cosine theta it15:30is maximized when theta is equal to 0, which means15:43u is in the same direction as gradient at a tilde. So,16:00in other words, u is equal to gradient of f at a tilde by its norm.16:11And this also justifies why we call it the gradient. So, the gradient tells you, the16:17word gradient tells you the slope at a point that is what the gradient means, in English16:23in colloquial language. And so, what we are getting is that the gradient actually tells16:29you that at a point what is the steepest slope. So, if you are standing at a particular point16:34on a mountainside the slopes could vary in different direction. So, the gradient tells16:40you the direction in which you have the steepest slope.16:45And we can also answer the second question, which is when does it remain unchanged? So,16:56it remains unchanged when the rate of change is 0, which means when fu is 0, so that is17:12when cosine is 0. And when is cosine 0? So cosine is 0 when theta is equal to pi by 217:23that is theta is equal to pi by 2, which is the same as saying that u is orthogonal to17:34or perpendicular because here we are using Euclidean norm and so on, so that is perpendicular17:41or at 90 degrees to the gradient vector.17:46So, we have answered these three things. When is it minimized in the opposite direction17:54to the gradient vector? When is it maximized when it is in the same direction as the gradient17:59vector? And when is the directional derivative constant when you move in a direction perpendicular18:05to the gradient vector.18:07Now, I want to warn you that in two dimensions, of course, saying perpendicular to the gradient18:14vector means that you go either, so it is a line, you go along this way or this way,18:20but we are in n dimensions. And in n dimension that means there is an equation that you have18:26to solve. And if you do your linear algebra, that means you have a subspace of dimension18:32n minus 1. And we will not talk a lot about that in this video, but this may come up later.18:41So, this is this the, these are the answers to these questions. So, we have completely18:46answered the original question, which was in what direction does water flow? On the18:51other hand, if you want to ask, you are an adventure seeker and you want to go in the18:58direction where the slope is steepest, you want to do rock climbing and you want to climb19:03up fastest, so what direction should you go in, the direction of the gradient vector,19:07that is what we have understood from here.19:10And, on the other hand, if you have, if you do not want to change your altitude at all.19:16You want to keep going at the same altitude and just hope that you do not have to climb19:22down or climb up. And maybe if you go around then you will hit a plateau and you can go19:26you up, you do not want to do any climbing up or down. Then you go in the direction in19:30which the gradient is perpendicular, so you go in that direction. Fine.19:37So, just to summarize what we have said. So, assuming the hypothesis as in the previous19:43slide the property of steepest ascent is in terms of directional derivative that is saying19:50that fu is positive and maximum and that takes place when u is equal to gradient of f divided19:55by its norm.19:57The property of steepest descent occurs in terms of directional derivative when fu is20:03negative and minimum and the direction is the negative of the gradient, and you divide20:08by its norm to make it norm 1. And the property of no change in the height in the altitude20:17or which means in terms of functions no change in the function. So that occurs in terms of20:23directional derivatives when fu is 0, and that is a direction orthogonal to gradient20:30of f. So, this summarizes what we have done so far.20:34Let us do a couple of examples to put this in perspective. So, suppose I have the function20:40f x, y is sin x y, let us compute the gradient. We have actually done this computation before,20:46so the gradient at x comma y is so at x you differentiate with respect to x, so that gives20:54me y times cosine of x, y, and then x times cosine x, y, that is with respect to y. So,21:02let us choose a particular point and evaluate over there what happens.21:06So, suppose I choose the point, let us say pi comma 1, so at pi comma 1 what is the direction21:22of steepest descent on the graph of this function? So, let us first evaluate the gradient vector21:44at this point. So, if you take pi comma 1, so this is 1 times cosine of pi, comma pi21:55times cosine of pi.21:58Now cosine of pi is minus 1, so this tells us that this is minus 1 comma minus pi, so22:08the direction in which you should move is opposite to this. So, u is going to be minus22:14gradient f at pi comma 1 divided by its norm, which is 1 comma pi divided by root of 1 plus22:32pi squared. So, this is the direction in which you should move.22:39If you want to, for example, move in the direction where of steepest ascent, where the function22:44increases the fastest, the direction in which the function increases the fastest, then you22:49should move along minus 1 comma minus pi, the unit vector in that direction. And if22:53you want to move along the direction where it does not change, so then you should move23:01perpendicular to this vector, which is the vector pi comma minus 1 or minus pi comma23:081, so in either of those directions.23:10Let us similarly do this example. So, here we compute the gradient, so that is 2x comma23:182y comma 2z. And so, suppose I want to now ask the same thing about let us say at 1 comma23:331 comma 1 what is the direction in which the function increases fastest? So, the answer23:53is in the direction of the gradient vector.23:56So, the gradient at 1, 1, 1 is 2 comma 2 comma 2. And so, it should be in the direction,24:03so in the direction of u equals 2 comma 2 comma 2. And because we typically make this24:15a unit vector we should divide by its norm. So, 2 squared is 4 times 3 is 12, so this24:25is 1 over root 3, 1, 1, 1. So, instead if you wanted the direction of no change, so24:35in which direction does the function remain constant?24:47So, for this, we will have to move perpendicular to the vector 2, 2, 2. Now there is many choices25:01for the perpendicular direction. So, this will be any vector which is on the plane x25:10y z such that 2x plus 2y plus 2z is 0. So, I will encourage you to work out some vectors.25:21So, examples of such would be 1 comma minus 1 comma 0, of course, we should take the unit25:28vectors, so, I will divide by root 2 or you could have 1 by root 2 comma 1 comma 0 comma25:34minus 1.25:35And, in fact, this is a basis for those directions. So, any linear combination of these two would25:43be perpendicular to this direction, and that will be a direction in which the function25:54remains constant. So, I hope the idea here is clear. I want to emphasize that this this26:00video is extremely important because this is exactly what you are going to use when26:05you do something called gradient descent in machine learning.26:09So, in machine learning, you will have a phenomenon called gradient descent where you try to keep26:14decreasing something or increasing something decreasing usually, and so, at a when you26:21are at a particular solution you try to minimize some quantity so as to get what we will call26:27a better solution. So, so please, yeah, please understand this video very well.26:36I want to end on this cautionary note, since we have been doing this example for a while,26:44now, I want to again emphasize this example to say that we need to know the continuity26:50of the gradient function. So, recall that for this function, the gradient of f at 0,26:560 was 0 comma 0, but the directional derivatives at 0, 0 other than the x and the y axis meaning27:07the i and j these did not exist unless use e1 or e2 or minus e1 or minus e2, which will27:22be just negative of these.27:26So, this thing that we used earlier that fu is equal to gradient dot u, and which we use27:34in order to compute the direction in which it is maximum or minimum that here it is none27:42of those things are applicable. So, you need to know that your gradient is in fact continuous27:48in a small neighborhood. And so, it may happen that the function is actually has edges.28:01So, it is jagged over there. And if that happens then you cannot use any of what we are doing28:08here. So, in such places, the gradient is not going to be, the partial derivatives will28:13not be continuous, and then we cannot apply this theory. So, it may still happen that28:19there is a direction. For example, if it is like this and inclination is more over here28:24you do not want to go in this direction, but we cannot say that from the gradient.28:31So, that condition is important. So, let us summarize quickly what we have done in this28:38video. So, we have seen this very important idea that, if you have a function f for which28:45the gradient functions continuous, then in order to compute the direction in which the28:52function increases most at a point that is the gradient at that point, the direction28:58in which the function decreases the most rapidly at that point, that is the negative of the29:06gradient direction, and the direction in which the function stays constant that is orthogonal29:14or perpendicular to the direction of the gradient at that point. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.