---
title: "L10.2: Tangents for scalar-valued multivariable functions :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L10.2: Tangents for scalar-valued multivariable functions :: IITM Online Degree

L10.2: Tangents for scalar-valued multivariable functions

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the Online BSc program on Data Science00:18and Programming. In this video, we are going to talk about tangents for scalar-valued multivariable00:24functions. So, we have seen the notion of tangents for functions of one variable. This00:30is a topic that we studied extensively when we read one variable calculus, and we used00:36it to study the ideas of the tangent line, and the idea of differentiability and the00:43derivative. So, let us recall first what are tangent lines to curves.00:47So, a tangent line to a curve C at a point P on the curve C is a line which represents00:55the instantaneous direction in which the curve C moves at the point P. So, later on, we summarize01:02this information in terms of the derivative. And traditionally, we have thought of, we01:07think of tangents as lines, which just touch the curve at that point.01:15As we now know, the idea of just touches is a little vague, which is why you have to use01:21more involved definitions like the derivative. And as examples, here are curves that we had01:27actually seen in our study of one variable calculus, along with the tangents to those01:33curves. So, this is just a recollection of what we had done in one variable calculus.01:39So, from here, how did we move to functions?01:42So, we looked at the graph of the function. So, suppose we have f from D to R, which is01:50a function, where D is, of course, now a subset of R. So, if we assume that the graph is a01:58curve and we take a point in this domain D then the tangent line to f at that point,02:07x is the tangent to the graph of that function f at the point x comma f of x, this was our02:14definition.02:15And just as an example, here is the function f of x is x cube and you can see these tangent02:21lines. So, if your function is nice, by which we mean it is differentiable then you can02:28compute the explicit equations for these tangent lines by looking at y minus f of a is equal02:38to f prime of a times x minus a, this is the equation of the tangent line at the point02:44a.02:45And we saw that this notion of just touches, can have interesting implications. For example,02:53for y is x cube, if you will draw the tangent at 0 then it is actually the x axis and that03:00actually cuts the curve of the, that actually cuts the graph of the function f of x is x03:08cube. So just touches can have various implications for what it means.03:14It can be like any of these lines, the red lines which are drawn or it can actually be03:19a line, which cuts the curve, and those are kind of special or interesting points, as03:26we later saw in our study of maxima and minimum. So, this is just a collection of tangents03:32for functions of one variable.03:35Now, we want to study tangents for scalar-valued multivariable functions. So, what do we mean03:42by tangents? What do, what does the collection of tangents look like and so on? So, we already03:48have some idea about this, when we studied the notion of partial derivatives and directional03:54derivatives because what we did there was we restricted ourselves to a particular line,03:59then we said, let us look at how the function looks on top of that line. And over there,04:03we said, well, now we, over here we ask what is the rate of change of the function when04:10we restricted to that line, which made sense because we had restricted to a function of04:17one variable. We will use the same idea here.04:20So, suppose you have for now let us start with two variables. So, suppose you have a04:26function of two variables, which is defined on a domain D in R2 and contains some open04:32ball around the point a comma b, which sometimes are represented by a tilde. So, consider a04:40line L in D passing through a tilde and restrict f to L. This is exactly what we did in when04:46we defined the notion of the directional derivative.04:50And since it is now a function of one variable, we can consider the tangent to f at a tiled04:54over L, as in the previous slide. By previous slide, I mean, since it is a function of one05:00variable we know exactly what we mean by tangent. It is the line which represents the instantaneous05:06direction of the graph. And that is the line that we consider.05:14So, if the line L is in the direction of the unit vector u, then the tangent if it exists05:21and we know examples from one variable calculus where it does not exist, will be the line05:26with slope f u of a tilde and passing through the point a tilde comma f of a tilde. So,05:31let us understand this statement better. So, we know from one variable calculus, as we05:36just observed that the equation of the tangent is given by the derivative at that point,05:46so once we know the derivative at that point in one variable calculus that is, then we05:51can compute what is the equation of the tangent line.05:54So, now what we have done here is we have restricted ourselves to the line L. So, we06:00have a one variable function and then using that one variable function, what is the derivative,06:06that is exactly the directional derivative, where how do you compute the directional derivative,06:11well you take this line L, and you look at unit vector, which is pointing in the same06:16direction as that line L.06:17Of course, this line L may not pass to the origin. So, what you have to do is you have06:22to translate this line L parallelly back to the origin, and then on that line L, you have06:26to take a unit vector. Once you take this unit vector, you have to compute the directional06:31derivative. And once we compute that directional derivative, you can use that to compute the06:39equations of the point, so it will be a line.06:41So, if this is the line L. And earlier when we had the one variable situation, this was06:49your x axis, this was your y axis, and so you had this line below, and the derivative06:57was something like this, so it was with respect to the x axis, when we took the derivative,07:03it told you the slope, meaning the angle with respect to the x axis.07:06So now your line is some arbitrary line in our R2, so what you do is above this line07:14you take a line with the slope prescribed by f u of a tilde. And so, this is a line07:20with that slope, passing through the point a tilde comma f of a tilde so this uniquely07:24determines the line. And let us see a couple of examples of this in GeoGebra.07:30So, let us look at the function, f of x, y is x, y. So, here is the function f of x,07:37y is x, y, so rather interesting looking function. Let us look at the point, let us say one comma07:45one. So, if you look at the point one comma one. Let us take a plane passing through that07:57point, according to this unit vector. So, I have some unit vector, which I am going08:04to change now as this changes.08:06So, here is a plane passing through the point 1 comma 1. So, I hope you can see the plane.08:13And now let us restrict the graph of this function to that plane. So, if we do that,08:19then we get this curve. So, let me let me remove the, so I hope you can see the curve08:24on the plane. So let me remove the graph. So, here is the graph, which is 1 and here08:31is how the how it looks like on that plane. And now if I remove that plane, you will see08:38further that this is how it looks like on the line below that, which is passing through08:45the point 1 comma 1.08:47And now, we can ask what is the tangent to this add 1 comma 1. So, if we compute what08:54that is, well, here is how that tangled looks like. So, here is the tangent. So, I hope09:03you can see the tangent. And we can vary this as the unit vector u varies, which is the09:10same as saying as the plane vary.09:11So, I will bring back the plane. So, this is all happening on this plane. It is clear09:16I hope from the picture. And as I vary my plane or my unit vector, rather, you will09:22see how this changes. So, as the plane changes the corresponding, so these are all planes09:31passing through that same point as the unit vector changes, the corresponding part of09:36the graph changes that you have changes and so the tangent changes. So, this is how it09:42looks like.09:44Let us do another example. So instead of these, suppose now I have the graph of the function,09:54sine of x, y. So, this was again a function that we have seen before. So, here is sine09:59of x, y. Let us look at the point maybe 1 comma 0.10:02So, here is a plane passing the point 1 comma 0. I hope you can see it. And now let us see10:11what the intersection of these two is that gives you the following curve, and I will10:17remove this graph so you can see the curve. So, we have seen this curve before, as well.10:21So, this is the curve passing through 1 comma 0.10:27And now we can ask what is the tangent to that. So, if you look at the tangent, here10:31is how the tangent looks like. So, this is at the point 1 comma 0, and I can vary my10:41unit vector. And as I vary my unit vector, the plane changes accordingly, the part of10:47the graph which is intersected with the plane changes, and accordingly the tangent line10:53changes. So, I hope you can see what is happening. So, this is just a visual demonstration of11:03what we said in that previous slide.11:05So, the main point here is that, if you have this line L, you get the corresponding plane11:12above that, and on that plane you have this line, which has slope f u of a tilde, and11:18which passes to the point a tilde comma f of a tilde. So, using these facts we can write11:23down the equation of this line.11:25And let us try to write down what that equation is. So, we can write this equation down in11:31several ways. So, first of all, what is the line below? So, I am going to take u to be11:38a u1 comma u2. So, this is the unit vector on that line. So, unit vector on L and then11:53a, b is my point. So, a, b so a tilde equal a, b is the point where I want to compute12:05the equation of the tangent line. So, fu a, b is the directional derivative at that point.12:18So, these are the, these are the, this is everything that I know. So first of all, what12:32is the equation of the line? So, for the line, so first of all, we know that it is on the12:42x, y plane, so that means z is zero, this is one of the defining factors. And the other12:48is that it passes through the point a comma b, and it is in the direction of the unit12:53vector, u1 comma u2.12:56So, since that is the case, we can write down the equation as so u1 times y minus b is equal13:05to u2 times x minus a. And how do I check that this is indeed correct? Well, you can13:11see that the slope is u2 by u1 provided of course that you u1 is non-zero, and if u113:18is 0 you can see that it is the correct line which is x is equal to a.13:24And if you plug-in the values of x and y to a and b respectively then this equation is13:32satisfied because you have 0 is equal to 0 that means it passes through a comma b. So,13:37it is the intersection of these two planes. So z0 is a plane that is x, y plane, and u113:44times y minus b is u2 times x minus a is another plane, so it passes through that plane.13:52And in fact, if I remove this restriction that z is 0, then that is a plane above the13:58line L. So, the corresponding plane which I will denote by P is u1 times y minus b is14:04u2 times x minus a. So now, this is what I know. So, instead of writing L like this,14:13I can write it as a parametric equation and this is often very useful, so that we know14:19what is happening.14:22So, the other way of writing L is as xt is equal to a plus t times u1, yt is equal to14:38b plus t times u2, and zt is equal to 0 because it is on the x, y plane, so this is how you14:44write L. And how did I get this?14:45Well, this is if you remember from linear algebra, lines are meaning any arbitrary line14:52is an affine flat, and how do I get those by translating some line which passes through14:57the origin, which means a subspace of dimension one. And with subspace is that? That is the15:03line which is passing through the vector u1 comma u2. So, based on that what I can say15:11is that xt, yt, zt is exactly just to reiterate this, a, b 0 plus t times u1, u2, 0.15:27So, this is saying that if you have you are shifting the line passing through u1 comma15:33u2 comma 0, because it is on the x, y axis, x, y plane, so that it passes through a comma15:42b. This was exactly the idea of affine flats. And we are going to use the same idea now15:47to write down the equation of the tangent line as well.15:54So, what happens for the tangent line. So, we have identified the line L and the plane15:59P. So, the tangent line is actually on this plane P, and it is at an angle of a fu meaning16:09the tangent of the angle, the tan of the angle, which it makes with L is fu of a comma b.16:15So, parsing that out, what it means is, if on that line you move a unit distance, which16:21means that you move by that unit vector then the z coordinate will move by fu a comma b.16:29So, what that means is, just to put that in perspective, what that means is that the parametric16:39equations will be given by xt is a plus tu1, yt is d plus tu2. So, this you expected because16:49when you project that line down the tangent line down you will get this line L, and we16:54have written down the parametric equations for that. So, the question is what happens16:58to zt.16:59And zt, as we just saw, if you move a unit distance, which means if t is one so that17:06means you're moved by that unit vector then the z coordinate will move by fu of a comma17:14b. So, then I can write this, as f of a comma b plus t times fu of a comma b, so these are17:27the parametric equations for the tangent line.17:33Now you can rewrite this in various ways. For example, you can rewrite this in the following17:45form x minus a by u1 is y minus b by u2 is z minus f of a comma b by fu of a comma b.17:58Of course, you assume that these are non-zero, if they are 0 there is a way of interpreting18:02this, etc. So, this is called the symmetric equations for the line. Not very important,18:09but I am just mentioning it. And the other way of writing it is the way we have viewed18:16this as an affine flat and that is really the very interesting.18:23So, what we are saying is that, this line is a line passing through a comma b comma18:33f of a comma b, so xt, yt, zt just to rewrite this is a comma b comma f of a, b. So, this18:47is a point plus t times u1 comma u2 comma fu of a comma b. And what is this saying?18:56This is exactly corresponding to the equation here.19:01So, again this is, so this line is in affine flat, it passes through a comma b comma f19:08of a comma b that is why I have translated it by this point. And if you translate it19:12back to the origin, what line do you get, you get the line passing through u1 comma19:17u2 comma f of fu of a comma b. Why is that? Because the line here was u1 comma u2 comma19:240, it was a line passing through u1 comma u2 comma 0.19:28And the line that you have your makes an angle of theta where tan theta is fu of a comma19:38b. So, if you translate that you get this same line here and that is what it say that19:44it is the line passing through this vector here, that is exactly what we mean by the19:51derivative. So, this explains why we get this line. So again, this is the vector form of19:58you can often called the vector form.20:03So, these are the equations of the tangent line. So, I hope this explanation shed some20:09light on how we obtain these tangent line equations. So, let us see a couple of examples20:14so that we can make this concrete.20:17So, let us compute some of these things in the at the mentioned points and in the mentioned20:23directions. So, let us look at the function x plus y and the tangent at 1 comma 1 in the20:29direction of 1 comma 0. So, how do I get this? So, for this, I have to first find the directional20:38derivative.20:39So, let us find the directional derivative. So, the directional derivative, so first I20:45should find del f del x, which is actually what this is at 1 comma 1. So, add x comma20:53y del f del x is just 1. So, her and then, so what I want here is, so this is exactly21:07fu because u is 1 comma 0, so this is fu at any point so I am particular at 1 comma 1.21:16So fu at 1 comma 1 is 1 and now we can write down the equations.21:21So, maybe, let me do it in the vector form that is the easiest. So, in the vector form21:28it is xt, yt, zt is a comma b comma f of a, b, so f of a, b is21:391 because a and b are 1 respectively. So, f of 1 comma 1 is two, plus t times u1 comma21:48u2 which his up here, comma fu of a comma b, fu of a comma b we have computed as 1,21:54so this is what we get. So, the other way of writing this is to say that xt is 1 plus22:03t, yt is 1, and zt is 2 plus t.22:16So, and now you can try and visualize this in GeoGebra. I will encourage you to do that.22:24Let us do the next one, which is f of x, y is xy. We actually saw this example a few22:32minutes ago. So here, we have to compute this in the direction of 3 comma 4, so first, we22:38need a unit vector in that direction.22:39So, what is a unit vector in that direction? Well, you can compute it is 3 by 5 comma 422:46by 5, then we need to compute what is fu of 1 comma 1. So, to do that let us use since22:53it is a nice function, I can use my gradient formula. So, what is the gradient of f at23:00x comma y it is so differentiating with respect to x, this is y with respect to y it is x,23:09so gradient f at 1 comma 1 is just 1 comma 1 again.23:16And then fu of a comma b is so fu of 1 comma 1 is one times u1, so one-times 3 by 5, plus23:271 times 4 by 5, which is 7 by 5. So, now I can write down my equations. So, in the parametric23:39form or in the vector form I get xt, yt, zt is the point, so 1 comma 1 comma f of the23:50point, so which is 1 again, because f of 1 comma 1 is 1 plus t times u1 comma u2, 3 by23:595 comma 4 by 5 comma fu of 1 comma 1, which is 7 comma 5, 7 by 5.24:10So, which gives us 1 plus 3t by 5 comma 1 plus 4t by 5 comma 1 plus 7t by 5. And from24:28here, you can get the parametric form. So, I hope you can see it is not at all difficult24:35to compute these once we know how to do a directional-derivatives, fine. The final example24:41is you have sine of x, y. I think, we have computed this before.24:47So, in the direction of 1 comma 2. So first what is a unit vector? So, this is u is 124:53over root 5, 1 comma 2. And then what is the gradient? So, the gradient of f at x, y is25:03y times cosine x, y comma x times cosine x, y. So, if we compute this at pi comma 1, we25:12get a gradient of f at pi comma 1 is cosine of pi, which is minus 1 and then pi times25:30cosine of pi, which is minus pi.25:34So, fu of at pi comma 1 is minus 1 times a 1 by root 5, plus minus pi times 2 by root25:535, which is some fairly nasty looking expressions. So, minus 2 pi minus 1 by root 5. So, this26:02is fu of pi comma 1, and now we can easily write down what is the vector form of this26:10tangent line.26:11So, xt, yt, zt is you take your points, so pi comma 1 comma evaluate the function at26:16this point, sine of pi, sine of pi is 0 plus t times u1, sorry u1 is 1 by root 5 not 126:33comma 2 by root 5, comma minus 2 pi minus 1 by root 5, and now you can get the parametric26:40form as well. So, I hope these examples are somewhat illustrative of how to compute these26:49tangent lines.26:50So, let us now go ahead and do the same thing for general functions of n variables. So,27:01we did this in two variables because it is easy to visualize this in terms of pictures,27:06but now we can do this for n variables.27:09Now, we cannot really visualize this any longer, but the ideas are exactly the same. So, suppose27:17you have a function f of x tilde, which is defined on a domain D in Rn containing some27:21open ball around your point a tilde you take a line restrictive f to that line passing27:26a tilde that is, and since it is a function of one variable, we can consider the tangent27:31to f at a tilde over L as before.27:34So, if the line L is in the direction of the unit vector u, then the tangent if it exists27:39will be the line with slope fu of a tilde and passing through the point a tilde comma27:43f of a tilde. And from here we can find out the equation of the line.27:49So, how do we do that? So, this is very similar to the two-variable case. And what we can27:57do is now suppose, I have n variables. So, the n plus 1th variable, let me denote by28:05xn plus 1. So now, I have or let me denote the n plus 1 variable by z. So, the first28:16n plus 1 variables are x1, x2, xn and the n plus 1th variable, which we are using to28:27measure the function, let us call that z. So, z is the variable in which we are measuring28:38the function.28:43So, then, exactly the same way as we have done for the previous case, we can look at28:56the line passing through the point a tilde. So, a tilde is a1, a2, an, and which is in29:07the direction of the unit vector u. So, u is u1, u2, un. So, the line through a tilde29:22in the direction of u is for the parametric equations are x of t, so xi of t is ai plus29:40t times ui. So again, a line passing through u1, u2, un it will be t times u1, u2, un and29:51now you are translating it by the vector a.29:55So, that is for i that this happens. So, in terms of the vector form. And of course, I30:01have to also say what happens for the coordinates z, so z is 0. So, in other words, in the coordinate30:07form this is x tilde of t comma z of t is a tilde comma 0 plus t times u comma 0.30:21So, z is not playing any role, because everything is right now it is still the line in the x1,30:30x2, xn space. So, now, this line, I want to take the line which is at an angle of theta,30:40where theta is tan of theta is fu of a tilde. And once again, what that means is, so therefore,30:49the tangent line to f at a tilde above L, so if I call this above line L, so this this31:02line I am calling L.31:08So, above L is, so the first n coordinates remain the same and then for z we know how31:19much it jumps. So, if x the first n coordinates move by a unit vector then z moves by fu,31:26this is exactly what we mean by rate of change. So, that means what we will get is it x-tilde31:32of t comma z of t is equal to a tilde comma f of a tilde plus t times u comma fu of a31:45tilde.31:48And now you can write down the parametric form. So, this is the vector form. So, for31:51the parametric form you will have xi of t is ai plus t times ui, exactly as we had for31:59the line L and the remaining coded is a t, so for zt we will have f of a tilde plus t32:08times fu of a tilde. So, we can write it in either which way, the vector form or the parametric32:14form.32:15Let us do an example. So, this might make it easier to view. So, what you do remember32:20is that these are the two forms for the tangent line. So, either this which is the vector32:29form or the second one, which is the parametric form. So, you have f of x, y is, so you have32:36f of x, y, z is x, y, plus y, z plus z, x and let us see what is the tangent at 1,1,132:42in the direction of minus 1 minus 2,2. So first, we will compute the unit vector. So,32:47if you compute the unit vector that is one-third times minus 1 comma minus 2 comma 2.32:55So now, we need to know what is the directional derivative in this direction, at the point33:031 comma 1 comma 1. So, for that we need the gradient. So, let us compute what is the gradient33:10of x, y, z. So, the gradient of x, y, z is y plus z, z plus x, x plus y. So, at 1 comma33:221 comma 1. This is 2 comma 2 comma 2. So, from here, we can compute the vector equation33:30so that is going to be xt, yt, zt. I am using zt here, already.33:37So, the function, let us view it in terms of u, so that is a last variable. So, ut,33:47this is the point which is 1 comma 1 comma 1 comma the function evaluated at 1 comma33:581 comma 1, which is 3 plus t times the unit vector 1. So minus one-third, minus two-third34:11comma fu. And what is fu? So, I have just computed the gradient. So, what is fu? So,34:19fu at 1 comma 1 comma 1 is gradient dot with u, so that is 2 comma 2 comma 2 dot with one-third34:30minus 1 comma minus 2 comma 2, so which is minus two-third.34:36So, here I will get minus two-thirds. So, the vector equation will be xt is 1 minus34:47t by 3, yt 1 minus 2t by 3, zt is 1 plus 2t by 3 and ut which is what represents the function35:04that is 3 plus or 3 minus 2t by 3. So, this is very easy. Once we know what to compute,35:14it is very easy to actually compute it. Of course, we have implicitly used here that35:19we know that the gradient is continuous, which is why we can compute the directional derivative35:27fairly easily.35:30So, let us now add a word of caution, because from here, it may seem that all is hunky dory.35:38So, let us remember that tangents need not always exist. So, we have seen this even in35:43one dimension. So, if you take f of x, y is x, y by x squared plus y squared, if x, y35:50is not 0, 0, and 0 of x, y is 0, 0 we know that at the point 0, 0 there is some problem.35:55So, we have seen in this example that the partial derivatives exist, so gradient f at36:020, 0 well, for u1, comma u2 is 0 if it is one of the unit vectors in the x or y direction36:20is e1 plus minus e1 or plus minus e2, but it does not exist otherwise.36:29And my bad, this is f sorry, I meant to say fu of at 0, 0. And so, once we know that the36:43partial derivative does not. The directional derivative in the particular direction does36:47not exist, we know from our one variable calculus that the derivative of a one variable function36:53exists is precisely the same as saying that the tangent line exists otherwise, there is36:58no notion of a tangent line.37:00There is no line, which captures the behavior of the instantaneous direction. So, that means37:06the tangent lines in all directions other than37:21along the x or y axis at 0, 0 do not exist, that is exactly what it means. Let us look37:35at the function mod x plus mod y, this is maybe even crazier. And here, it is not going37:41to exist for many, many directions.37:43So, for most directions or let us say at for many directions at many points, the tangent38:02link will not exist. I will suggest you do the algebra yourself, but instead, we look38:13at a picture of this graph and I think you will appreciate what I mean.38:17So, here is a picture of the graph of this function. This is the function mod x plus38:24mod y, and you can see it has lots and lots of corners, it has faces, and then it has38:29corners. So, if you are along a face then then maybe you have a chance that a tangent38:34does exist because that will be like some kind of a constant function, but if you move38:38your plane even a little that will be a lot of trouble because then you will have lots38:43of corners and then the tangent may not exist. So just to give you an idea of what I am saying38:49here let us intersect this with some plane.38:54So, if I look at the corresponding graph, you can see how it looks like. I will remove39:01the graph of the function, here is how it looks like. You can see there is lots of edges,39:07and it is not even at some point it is even becoming, it is not even touching each other39:13and there are corners at various places. And as we move the plane, you will see that the39:18graph has lots of problems.39:20So, let us switch this animation on, and you can see, it looks very much like the mod x39:26is mod y. See, it always has some jagged part. So, if you are at those points you will have39:33trouble. So, I hope this animation convinces you that there is a lot of places where the39:42tangent and there are a lot of directions that in which the tangent will not exist.39:46So, we can ask when do all the tangents exist? And so, this is equivalent to asking when39:51do all the directional derivatives exist? And this is a question that we actually know39:55the answer for. So, if f of x1, x2, xn is a function defined in our domain D in Rn containing40:00some open ball around the point a tilde, then we have this wonderful theorem, that if the40:05gradient exists and is continuous on some open ball around the point a tilde then for40:09every unit vector u, the directional derivative fu of a tilde exists and equals gradient f40:15of f at a tilde dot with u. And this says that the directional derivative exists, and40:23we have a formula to compute it, and that exactly means that the tangent exists in that40:28direction, and that we can write down its equation, which we have done a few slides40:33ago.40:34So, conclusion is that all the tangents at a point a tilde exist when gradient f exists40:40and is continuous on some open ball around the point a tilde. And once that happens,40:44we know how to write down the equation of the tangent line. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.