---
title: "Week 10 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# Week 10 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree

Week 10 - Tutorial 01

Transcript Language

English

00:15Hello everyone. So, in this video we will try  to find the maximum value of the directional  00:19derivative of a function at some given point. So,  the maximum value of the directional derivative  00:24occurs when the grad of that function, the  gradient of that function and the unit vector  00:32point in the same direction. So, what does it mean? Suppose, I have  00:36given a function f x1 to xn, so this is a  function of n variable, let us assume this  00:42is a scalar valued function. Now, what we have to  do, so for calculating the directional derivative  00:49what we generally do, we calculate  the gradient of it at some point.  00:54So, suppose the point is given as a1 to an, so we  will calculate the gradient at that point and some  01:01vector is given at the direction of which we want  to calculate the directional derivative. Suppose,  01:07u is the given vector and suppose u is the unit  given vector, so we will calculate grad f at  01:14that point with dot product with u, so u is the  vector, unit vector given at that direction. So,  01:22given that, which is given and at that direction  we are calculating the directional derivative.  01:28Now, it will be maximum when  this unit vector will be  01:34at the direction of this  gradient vector. So, it will be,  01:37the directional derivative will be maximum, so  I can write the maximum directional derivative,  01:46it is basically when this gradient  vector, so this is the gradient vector,  01:54the unit vector is along the same direction,  so we will calculate the unit vector along this  02:01gradient vector along this direction  of this gradient vector. So, what we  02:06have to do? We have to divide it by its norm. So, we have to normalize it to get the unit vector  02:13along that direction, so, and so this is my  unit vector, this grad f by norm of grad f  02:21at that point and we have to take the dot  product with gradient vector. So, this will  02:26give us the maximum directional derivative at  some point, at that given point. So, this is,  02:33what this is, this is basically the numerator we  have got, norm of gradient vector at that point,  02:44square of the norm and in the denominator  02:47what we got, at the denominator we got  this norm of gradient vector only.  02:54So, this one we can say now and we will get  the norm of gradient vector at that point,  03:03so this is the maximum directional derivative at  the given point. And the direction at which we are  03:12calculating this directional derivative that u,  here u is nothing but the unit vector along the  03:18direction of the gradient. So, this is grad f  at the point a1 to an by norm of grad a at the  03:28point a1 to an, so this is the direction at which  we are calculating the directional derivative,  03:35so at this direction the reaction derivative  will be the maximum and the value will be  03:40norm of gradient vector at that point. So, let us try to figure take an example and  03:46see this. So, let us consider the function  f x, y equal to 3x square plus 2y square,  03:57so let us calculate the grad f first, so grad of  f x, y is 6x comma 4y so this is basically fx,  04:06comma fy, so partial derivative with respect to  x it will be the first coordinate our partial  04:10derivative with respect to y it will be the  second coordinate, so this is 6x, comma 4y.  04:16Now, we want to find the direction at which  this directional derivative will be maximum. So,  04:22the direction will be, suppose I am denoting it  by u, so this is grad of f x, y by norm of f x, y.  04:36So, suppose I want to find this at the point  04:401, comma 1 so the point is  given. So, what should I do here,  04:44I should replace this x and y by 1 comma 1. So, I will replace this x and y by 1 comma 1.  04:55So, the unit vector along which we will calculate  the direction derivative so that the directional  05:01derivative will be maximum that is this vector.  So, what is grad of f at 1, comma 1 this is 6,  05:09comma 4 and if we calculate the norm of it, it  will be root over 6 square plus 4 square.  05:16So, this is 36 plus 16 that  is 52 so it is 2 root 13, 2  05:25root 13 and here it is 6, comma 4, so these 2 get  cancel up, I will get 1 by root 13 3 comma 2. So,  05:35along this direction the directional derivative  will be maximum and what will be the value of  05:40the maximum directional derivative. This is  basically the norm of the grad at that point.  05:46So, the maximum value of  the directional derivative  06:03at the point 1 comma 1  06:10is basically norm of grad f 1 comma 1. So, we have  already calculated the norm that is 2 root 13,  06:23so this is the maximum value of the directional  derivative and it is at the direction 1 by root 13  06:30into 3 comma 2 along this  direction. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.