---
title: "L8.4: The Gram-Schmidt process :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L8.4: The Gram-Schmidt process :: IITM Online Degree

L8.4: The Gram-Schmidt process

Transcript Language

English

00:14In this video we are going to talk about the Gram-Schmidt process. So, what is the Gram-Schmidt00:18process? Let us look at this process in a nutshell.00:23So, what the Gram-Schmidt process does is that in an inner product space it takes any00:31basis x1, x2, xn and it produces, we use the Gram-Schmidt process and it produces an orthonormal00:39basis v1, v2, vn. So, let us recall before we start going ahead what is a basis. So,00:46a basis is a linearly independent set which is also spanning.00:50So, in other words every element of your vector space or in this case for inner product space00:56can be written as a unique linear combination of these vectors x1, x2, xn. So, this is true01:03for any vector space that we can produce a basis and we have seen how to do that, but01:10suppose now that you have an inner product space. So, you have not only a vector space01:15but on that vector space you also have an inner product.01:19Then you can use the Gram-Schmidt process to get from these x1, x2, xn, which is a basis,01:27an orthonormal basis, which is, just to recall that each of these vectors are mutually orthogonal,01:34that means the inner product of vi, vj is 0 if i is not equal to j, and each of these01:41vectors have norm, that means the inner product of vi with itself so vi comma vi inner product01:46is 1. So, that is an orthonormal basis.01:49And in the previous videos we have seen why orthonormal basis are useful, because you01:54can express various phenomenon in very nice ways. In particular you can write down the02:01linear combination of any vector. The constants that appear in the linear combination or the02:08coefficients that appear in the linear combination very nicely, in terms of the inner product,02:14and further they represent something called the projection which we saw in the previous02:18video.02:19So, the project can be written or is the inner product of the given vector with some of these02:30vectors depending on where you want to project and that is one of the, I mean you have to02:36divide by something and so on. So, there was a formula that we found out last time, but02:40that formula was particularly easy if you are, first of all there is a formula if have02:45an inner product, if you have orthogonal basis and if it is orthonormal the formula is particularly,02:52you do not even have to divide by anything.02:55So, even in this video we are going to use this idea of projection and that is the main03:01sort of key tool in the Gram-Schmidt process.03:04So, let us do an example and the intuition behind that, and study the intuition behind03:11the Gram-Schmidt process. So, let us look at this basis for R3, 1, 2, 2; minus 1, 0,03:172 and 0, 0, 1. So, first of all you have to convince yourself that this is a basis. So,03:24recall that we know how to get basis for Rn by, if you have given n vectors how to check03:31if it is a basis, you just take those n vectors, put them into a metrics as the columns or03:37it is okay even as rows, and you compute the determinant. So, if the determinant is non03:420, then it will be a basis and you can check that indeed this is a basis. So, I will leave03:49that checking to you.03:50So, the question is can we use this to obtain an orthonormal basis for R3? So, now we want03:55to convert from this basis to another basis which is an orthonormal basis. Now, as we04:02have mentioned earlier in the convention here is that if no inner product is specifically04:08mentioned then that means you are looking at the standard inner product, the dot product04:12of R3. So, this is an orthonormal basis with respect to the dot product. So, that is what04:17we want to obtain, an orthonormal basis with respect to the dot product.04:21So, we start by taking 1, 2, 2, well if you want to get something, so let us start with04:25the first vector. Now we want a vector which is orthogonal to v1, so let us first try to04:34get an orthogonal basis. So, that means we want to get v1, v2, v 3, so that they are04:40mutually orthogonal. Then once we have an orthogonal basis we know how to go from there04:45to orthonormal, by dividing by each vector by its norm.04:50So, let v1 be 1, 2, 2; we want a vector which is orthogonal v1. So, last time we saw that04:57vectors which are orthogonal to v1 are exactly those which are in, what we call v1 perp or05:04in general if you have a subspace w, then vectors which are orthogonal to all vectors05:09in w are exactly, that set which happens to be a subspace is exactly the set or the subset05:18w perp. So, we want a vector which is in v1 perp or span of v1 perp. So, we use the projection05:27P v1 to v1. How do we use this?05:30Well, here is how we use it. define v2 to be, you take the second basis vector minus05:371, 0, 2, so you take this vector minus 1, 0, 2 and you subtract the projection of minus05:451, 0, 2 onto v1 from minus 1, 0, 2, that is what you do, and this is a standard computation05:52which is something we have done in the previous video namely P1 of minus 1, 0, 2 is some scalar06:04multiple of v1 and what is that scalar multiple? It is the inner product of minus 1, 0, 2 with06:101, 2, 2 divided by the norm square of 1, 2, 2.06:14So, if you compute this you get, the numerator is minus 1, plus 4 so 3 and the denominator06:22is 1 plus 4 plus 4, so 9. So, 3 by 9 is 1 by 3. So I get minus 1, 0, 2; minus 1 by 306:33times 1, 2, 2 and then if you do the subtraction this is what you get. Minus 4 thirds, minus06:392 thirds, 4 thirds. So, first of all why did we do this? So, this was because remember06:45last time that we saw that W perp, so we have any subspace W, then you have this other subspace06:56called W perp which is all those vectors v, such that v comma.07:01Let me write this carefully, v, such that inner product of v and W is 0 for all w in07:11W. It was this set and then we saw it is a subspace because we saw that this is the null07:17space of Pw. So, what are we doing here? To obtain something in W perp, what we should07:33do is we should get something so that when we evaluate Pw on that then it gives us 0.07:40So, Pw of v equal 0 if an only if v belongs to W perp, this was what we saw.07:53And the point is if you look at the identity minus Pw so this is, you evaluate this on08:01v, if you evaluate this on v so you get v minus Pw of v and if you again take Pw of08:13this, so now you have already projected, after you apply Pw you have already projected in08:23W, so remember that Pw composed Pw was just Pw because the projection does not change08:30elements in W and that gives us that this is 0. This was something we studied.08:35Which means that if you take any element of this firm over here, this is inside W perp.08:49So, this is what we have seen and that is exactly what we are using here, we are using08:55that if you do minus 1, 0, 2; minus P v1 of minus 1, 0, 2 so you can rewrite this as 109:02minus P v1, identity minus P v1 of minus 1, 0, 2 and this vector will be in v1 perp.09:13This is what the idea is for this computation, and that is why we do this computation, we09:18get v2 and this explanation below is a general method to see that v2 is in v1 perp, but you09:26can actually explicitly do this by taking this vector v2 and computing v2 comma v1,09:33I will encourage you to check that this is actually 0. So, let us move on.09:40So, now we have v1 and v2 which are orthogonal to each other, so now we want a vector which09:46is orthogonal to both v1 and v2, because remember we want to get an orthogonal basis. So in09:55other words we want this vector let us call it v3 to be in the span of v1, v2 perp. That10:01is what we want, and how do we do this? When we again use the projection and this is exactly10:08the idea that we had in the previous slide. You take this span of v1 comma v2 as W and10:15you apply, 1 minus, I minus Pw on some vector. You apply this on some vector and then you10:24are going to get a vector which is perpendicular to v1 and v2.10:28The only thing is you have to be careful that this vector that you have should not be already10:33in the span of v1, v2 and that is where this basis comes in. So, the third vector is not10:38in the span of v1, v2; how do I know that? Because the span of v1, v2 is the same as10:42the span of the previous vectors that we had, because you see this 1, 2, 2 is just v1 and10:52minus 1, 0, 2 and v1, the span, is the same as the span of v1 and v2. So, that is another10:59thing you should check because they are linear combinations of each other.11:02So, we know that v3 or the third basis vector is not in the span of v1, v2 and that is how11:09we are going to use it. So, define v 3 to be 0, 0, 1; minus P v1 of 0, 0, 1; minus P11:16v2 of 0, 0, 1. Now P W of 0, 0, 1 is exactly P v1 of 0, 0, 1 plus P v2 of 0, 0, 1. This11:25is something we saw in the previous video and now you can evaluate this. I will encourage11:30you to do that. It is a little bit of a computation and if you do it correctly, and I hope I have11:34done it correctly then I have got 2 by 9 comma minus 2 by 9 comma 1 by 3. I will encourage11:40you to check that.11:42And the point is, this is an orthogonal basis in orthogonal basis. And I do not even need11:51to check this because of what I did in the previous slide. I mean I gave you a general11:58theory for how to do this. So, this is an orthogonal basis. Now if you have not understood12:04why it is an orthogonal basis, I will encourage you again to check that this is an orthogonal12:08basis. So, check that v1, v2 is v1, v3 is v2, v3 is 0. If you have not completely followed12:25what I said in the previous slide.12:26So, in that case you will get that v1, v2 v3 is an orthogonal basis and now you divide12:31each vector by its norm. I will encourage you to check what is the norm and then if12:37you do that you get the orthonormal basis 1 third, 2 third, 2 third; minus 2 third,12:42minus 1 third, 2 third and 2 third, minus 2 third, 1 third. You may remember this basis12:48from a previous video.12:49So, now let us do the Gram-Schmidt process. The intuition we have seen already, you start12:56with a basis and then you keep modifying the vectors in that basis. So, as to get an orthogonal13:02basis and further you will be dividing by the norm. So, as to make it orthonormal. Now13:11the Gram-Schmidt process kind of takes this orthogonal basis and divide by the norm in13:16one shot meaning it does not wait till the end to divide. It starts dividing right from13:22the start. The reason being it helps for efficiency, computational efficiency.13:29So, let us start with the basis x1, x2, xn and define the orthogonal basis v1, v2, vn13:38and the corresponding orthonormal basis w1, 2, w n as follows. So, we v1 is x1, w 1 is13:46v1 by norm of v1. This is what we saw in the previous example. v2 is x2 minus x2 comma13:53w 1 inner product, times w1. So now why did not I, in the previous slides, in previous14:01example I took v2, x2 minus x2 comma v1,inner product and then divided by norm of v1 comma14:12v1 into v1.14:13So, the thing is if you already convert your basis vectors into the orthonormal form then14:21you need not divide by their norm because you know that the norm is 1, and this is what14:25I meant by saying that there is some computational efficiency. So, you do not have to keep dividing14:30by its norm. And then w 2 is v2 by norm of v2, so you have, v1 and v2 is an orthogonal14:38basis with span the same as x1, x2 and w1 and w2 is orthonormal basis which, I should14:45be careful, it is not a basis, so I take back the word basis.14:51These are linearly independent vectors, but which are orthogonal and w1 and w2 are orthonormal14:58vectors. So, they are automatically linearly independent. So, we will keep going. What15:05is the general term? So, the i th term will be given there, suppose you have reached i15:09minus 1 at stage, if you have vi minus 1 and wi minus 1, all the vectors are still there.15:15So, vi is xi minus inner product of xi comma w1 times w1 minus inner product of xi comma15:222 times w2 minus all the way up to inner product of xi comma wi minus 1 times wi minus 1, and15:29then wi is you normalize this vector.15:32Which means if you take vi and divide by its norm, and you keep going till the end and15:39in vn you have all the previous vectors defined till n minus 1 and then vn is xn minus inner15:47product xn comma w 1 times w 1 minus inner product xn comma w 2 times w 2, all the way15:53up to inner product xn comma w n minus 1 times w n minus 1, and then w n is vn by norm of16:01vn.16:02So, now the main point here is that if you take this basis w 1, w2, wn it is an orthonormal16:11basis. v1, v2, vn is an orthogonal basis and the reason this works, this is the main point,16:18is that span of the set x1, x2, xi minus 1 is equal to the span of the set v1, v2, vi16:33minus 1 and which is again equal to the span of the set, w1, w2, wi minus 1. And because16:46these spans are the same we know that x i does not belong to this span and we can carry16:52on.16:54So, the main take-homes in this, maybe before I come here I will point out also that this17:10part here is exactly equal to P span of w1 through wi17:26minus 1 of xi. This is the projection of xi, on to the subspace, spanned by w1, w2, wi17:38minus 1, and this comment appear, tells you that this is as a result the same as the projection17:43of xi on the span of x1, x2, xi minus 1. So, really this entire thing is about projecting17:54carefully and as we know projections give you things which are orthogonal. This was17:59the main point of the previous projection's video.18:03So, with that brief comment I will go to the next and final slide which is what the main18:10take-homes of this entire video. So, the main take-homes are that if you take any finite-dimensional18:15vector space with an inner product, so in other words a finite-dimensional inner product18:20space, then it has an orthonormal basis, this was not something obvious from the previous18:26videos that you can always get an orthonormal basis, but now not only can we get an orthonormal18:35basis we in fact have an explicit process. So, any basis can be changed to an orthonormal18:41basis using the Gram-Schmidt process.18:43So, how do you get an orthonormal basis? You start with any basis, so the assumption here18:48is that you can get a basis and indeed we have seen in previous videos how to get a18:53basis and, when I say previous videos, this is a few, maybe a week or so back or even19:01before that and then now once you get a basis you can change it to orthonormal basis by19:07using this Gram-Schmidt process.19:10So, the idea often is that when you have a, I mean when you are doing, using this kind19:16of mathematics, typically you happen to know a basis, yeah, you will somehow be able to19:23construct some basis and then it is some algorithm, namely the Gram-Schmidt process, that will19:31allow you to actually get an orthonormal basis, and once you get an orthonormal basis expressing19:37any vector in terms of this orthogonal basis becomes very easy. That is what you have seen19:42in the previous videos. So, with this I guess I will end this video. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.