---
title: "Modules :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# Modules :: IITM Online Degree

L4.1 What is a basis for a vector space?

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2  component of the online degree program  00:20on data science. So, in this video, we are going  to study what is the basis for a vector space.  00:25So, just to recall what we have done as part  of this module before, we have studied what  00:30are vector spaces, we have seen the notion of a  linearly dependent set in a vector space. And we  00:36have seen the notion of a linearly independent  set in a vector space. And, today's video  00:44about a basis builds on the fact that we know what  is linear independence of a set of vectors.  00:50So, let us quickly recall this idea of  linear dependence and linear independence.  00:54So, suppose we have a set of n vectors, v1, v2, vn  in a vector space V. so the set v1, v2, vn is said  01:02to be linearly dependent, if there exists scalers  a1, a2, an, not all 0, such that a1, v1 plus a2,  01:09v2 plus all the way up to an vn is 0. So, this means there is a linear combination of Vi  01:17which is a non-zero linear combination, which  means that at least one of the coefficients is  01:21non-zero. Note that this does not mean that all  the coefficients are non-zero, but it means that  01:26at least one of the coefficients is non-zero.  So, we have a linear combination such that,  01:33with non-zero coefficients and  that linear combination is 0.  01:39So, we are saying the question x1 v1 plus  x2 v2 plus xn vn has a non-trivial solution,  01:46this is what we saw last time. And now,  linear independence is saying it is not  01:51linearly dependent. So, explicitly what this means  is that the set v1, v2, vn is said to be linearly  01:57independent. If the only choice of scalars a1, a2,  an such that the corresponding linear combination,  02:04a1 v1 plus a2 v2 plus an vn is 0, so  this equals 0 is with a1 is 0.  02:11So, if you solve the equation v times x is 0  where v is a matrix given by writing the vectors,  02:21this is an RN. If you look at that matrix vx  is 0 where the columns of v are the vectors Vi  02:30then, that the only solution is x is 0. And saying  that it is linearly dependent means that there are  02:37solutions which are not the 0 solution. So, this  was linear dependence, and linear independence,  02:43particularly in the context of RN. So, let us first talk about what is the  02:50span of a set of vectors? So, span is  like an expanse. So how big can you get  02:56based on these vectors, that is the idea of span.  So, the span of a set is, of vectors, is defined  03:05as the set of all finite linear combinations of  vectors of S, and it is denoted by span S.  03:12So, explicitly what that means is, you take  all linear combinations where your coefficients  03:17run over all possible values in R, meaning each  coefficient runs over all possible values in R,  03:24and the span is that set. Now,  what is hidden here is that,  03:32the span of S is a vector space in its own rate,  meaning it is what is called a subspace of V.  03:40What that means is if you take a linear  combination of elements within span S, then  03:48they are still in span S. And if you take and  zero is also that, in particular by taking all  03:54the ai to be zero. So, here is an example. So, let  S, be the set, just the singleton set 1 comma 0.  04:05This is a vector in R2 and you look at the set  S, which consists of this particular vector.  04:11So, this is a subset of R2, and we can ask  what is the span of S. So, the span of S is,  04:17a times 1 comma 0, where a is in R which is  the set of vectors, a comma 0. And we know  04:26that this is exactly the x-axis in R2. So, the  span of the vector 1 comma 0 is the x-axis.  04:36So, let us do a couple of other examples. Let  us look at the set 1 comma, the set consisting  04:41of the singleton element 1 comma 1 in R2. So, you  can see that the span of S is linear combinations  04:48of 1 comma 1, which means a times 1 comma 1,  which is all vectors of the form a comma a. So,  04:57looking at this in R2, this means you  get the line, y is equal to x? So,  05:03the blue line is what is span of S? Again, you can see that, if you add vectors  05:09on this line, you still remain on this line.  So, let us see some more examples maybe in R3  05:14this team. So, let us look at the set 1 0 0 and  0 1 0 in R3 and let us ask, what is the span of  05:23this set? So, if you take linear combinations,  you will get times 1 0 0, plus B times 0 1 0,  05:30which is all vectors of the form a comma b  comma 0. So, you can see, this is exactly the x,  05:38y plane. So, span S in this case is the x, y  plane, which is drawn here in the picture.  05:47So, what are the spanning set for a vector space?  05:50So, let V b a vector space. So, a spanning set  is a set such that span of S is equal to V.  05:58So, that means we are looking at vectors so that  if you take linear combinations of those vectors,  06:04you can produce any vector in V so, or the  words, every vector of V is a linear combination  06:12of vectors, belonging to the set S, that is  what we mean by saying that span S is V.  06:18So, let us look at the set 1  comma 0 and 0 comma 1 and R2,  06:25then span of S is the entire R2, so this is  a spanning set for R2. Similarly, if you take  06:321 0 0, 0 1 0, and 1 comma 2, so  you add one more vector, clearly,  06:37still the span is going to be the entire R2. And  you can change your elements a little. So, if you  06:45take the vectors 1 comma 1 and 0 comma 1 then the  span of S is still R2. So, how do I see that?  06:52Well, one way of seeing it is that from 1 comma  1 and 0 comma 1, you can produce 1 comma 0 by  07:00taking 1 comma 1 minus 0 comma 1, so that  will give you 1 comma 0. So, that means the  07:05span contains 1 comma 0 and 0 comma 1. So, then if  the span contains some vectors, then this span of  07:16that set S is, also contains a span of the vectors  that you have produced in that span. I will make  07:23this more precise in the second. And let us look at an example in R3.  07:30So, if you look at the set of vectors 1 0  0, 0 10 and 0 0 1, then span of S is R3. So,  07:37let me quickly specify why that is the case.  So let us maybe look first at 1 0 and 0 1,  07:42so this first example, so if you take x  comma y in R2 then you can write x comma y as  07:53x times 1 comma 0 plus five times 0 comma 1. So, this means every vector in R2 can be written  08:00as a linear combination of these first two  vectors. So, that tells you that the span of  08:091 comma 0 and 0 comma 1 is indeed R2. The same  idea can be used for this if you take x y z in R3  08:22then x y z is x times 1 comma 0 comma  0, plus Y times 0 comma 1 comma 0  08:32plus z times 0 comma 0 comma 1. So, this tells you  that the span of these three vectors is the entire  08:38R3. So, this is a spanning set for R3. Similarly,  the first one was a spanning set for R2.  08:44How about the second one? That is clear, I can  still write x comma y as x times 1 comma 0 and  08:51plus y times 0 comma 1. So, really this  third vector here is kind of redundant. So,  08:57the point here is, if your set S is a spanning  set, then every superset is also spanning set.  09:04So, that is that is what this example is  trying to tell you. And then let us look at  09:09the third example. So, for the third example  what we want to say is the following.  09:17So, you can of course write every x y directly  as a linear combination of 1 comma 1 and 0 comma  09:221 which maybe I will do in a second. But  what I really wanted to point out was that  09:271 comma 0 is 1 comma 1 minus 0 comma 1. So  therefore, 1 comma 0 lies in the span of  09:40this set 1 comma 1 and 0 comma 1 and certainly  1 comma 0 lies and certainly 0 comma 1 also  09:50lies because it is one of those vectors in S.  So, therefore, the set 1 comma 0 and 0 comma 1  10:00belongs to contained in span of in this span. So, that implies span of this set is contained  10:09in the span of this, which implies the span is  R2. So, the main point here is the following,  10:15so what I am trying to say is the following. If  a set T is contained in a set S, then span of T  10:25is contained in span of S. So, this  is in fact what is a sub space.  10:32And if it so happens that T is a spanning  set, that means this is also spending set.  10:37That is what we just said that if you  have a superset, then we are good.  10:43So, in particular one can also say the  following that if T is contained in span of S,  10:50which is what I am using here, then  span of T is contained in span of S.  10:57So, these are things that we will be doing as  tutorial problems, so I will leave that for now.  11:06So, let us continue this. So, I hope we  have understood what is a spanning set,  11:09so spanning set means a set  such that every vector in V  11:14can be written as a linear combination of  this some particular vectors from S.  11:21So how do I get a spanning set? So, the  way to do this is, one way to do this is to  11:30add or maybe the right word here is ‘append’  vectors to obtain a spanning set for R3, I will  11:36use the word append instead of add, add  may leave you confused by addition in the  11:41vector space that is not what we mean. We mean  append, meaning take more and more vectors.  11:48So, we will try to build a spanning  set for the vector space R3.  11:52So, start with S0 to be the empty set, so  this is the notation for the empty set,  11:56a phi with a slightly tilted dashed on the middle.  12:04So, then span of 0 is span of  the empty set is 0 0 0. So,  12:08there is something here already to point out,  namely, that the span of the empty set is 0 0 0.  12:17We can think of this in two ways. One is that this is a convention,  12:21the other is that this is the empty linear  combination. So, the empty linear combination  12:27is always 0, that is again maybe a convention.  So, from there it follows that 0 0 0 as the span  12:35of the empty set. So, this, if you are not, if you  find this uncomfortable then just take this as a  12:43convention or a definition that span  of the empty set is the 0 vector.  12:49So, this is not the full vector  space. The full vector space is R3,  12:53so 0 0 0, is not the entire vector space R3.  You append a vector outside span of S0 in R3,  13:00say 0 to 1 to S0 and we will call  this new set S1. So, S1 is S0 union  13:08this new vector 0 to 1. So here, that is what  I mean by append, you put this inside your,  13:16you create a new set with this vector  appended to your original set. And we are  13:20going to keep continuing this process. This  is how we will obtain a spanning set.  13:25So, what is span of S1? So, span of S1 is exactly  this line shown here. So, the blue arrow is 0  13:34to 1, which is a vector that we had, and the  span of S1 is the line containing that arrow.  13:42So, now choose a vector outside span of  S1. So, as we can see it is just the line,  13:46so that means it is not the entire R3. So, we have  vectors which are outside this line, so choose a  13:54vector outside span of S1. So, for example, 2 2 0  appended to S1 and call that new set S2, so S2 is  14:02S1 union with this appended vector 2 2 0. So, span of S2 is this plane that you get. So,  14:12you can write down the equations for the plane,  which we will be doing eventually, in this  14:20in Maths 2. But if you can do it right away,  maybe you have learned this already in Maths 1 or  14:25maybe you have done it as part of some other  course, please do go ahead and write down what the  14:29equations for this plane are. In in any case, you  get a plane and so this is not the entire R2, and  14:36so we can choose a vector outside this plane. So, let us say choose a vector outside span of S2  14:43say 0 0 5 and append it to S2 and we will  call that new set S3. So, S3 is S2 union  14:500 0 5. So, you can see, we are increasing the size  of the set that we have. So, you keep adding more  14:56and more vectors, and hopefully as you keep  doing this you will hit a spanning set.  15:04So, now look at any arbitrary vector x y z in R3,  and we can write it in the following way. So, this  15:12is something you have to check x y z is y minus  x by two times, 0 2 1 plus x by 2 times 2 2 0  15:20plus x minus y plus 2z by 10 time 0 0 5. You  might find this puzzling where did I suddenly  15:27come up with these coefficients from, but you  can certainly check that this is correct. So,  15:33I will leave you to check it is correct. How to actually obtain this coefficient is  15:37something we will see eventually or you can try  to think of this as solving a system of linear  15:43equations, we have done this before, and I will  ask you to try to think about how to do this.  15:51So, you can treat your coefficient as variables.  We have done that in the previous video for linear  15:57independence, and you can try and rate x  y z as a linear combination of this.  16:03So, what is the point? The point is,  16:05span of S3 is the entire R3. How did I get  that? Because x y z can be expressed as a  16:10linear combination of these three vectors.  So that means the span is the entire R3.  16:16So, S3 is a spanning set for R3. So, what  did we do? We started with the empty set  16:24and then we kept adding vectors, but we added them  in a particular way. We added them so that the  16:29new vector that we added was not in the span of  the vectors that we had so far. And in this way,  16:36we created a spanning set. So, this is a  general template to create a spanning set.  16:43Let us do another example with this same idea. So,  start with S naught with the empty set as before,  16:48we know by convention or definition  that the span of the empty set is 0 0 0  16:54append any vector which is not in the span of S  naught, let us say in this case, we choose 3 0 0  17:01call this new set S1, so S1 is the set 3 0 0. And what is the span of S1? It is the x-axis. If  17:10you take 3 0 0 and take it spanned that means you  will get vectors of the form 3a comma 0 comma 0,  17:17which is exactly what the vectors on the X-axis  look like. So, the blue arrow is the vector 3 0  17:280\. And the line of course is the X-axis. So, let us choose a vector, which is  17:35outside the X-axis, let us say 2 2 1 and  let us append it to S1 and call the new set  17:41S2. So S2 is the set 3 0 0 and 2 2 1. Let us look  at what is span of S2. Well, it is this plane,  17:52this plane certainly passes to the X-axis. You  can see it intersects the X-axis somewhere,  17:57and it also contains the vector 2 2 1. So,  I will, again, encourage you to check what  18:03is the equation on this plane. In any case it  is a plane, so it is not the entire R3.  18:08So, you can choose a vector, which is outside  this plane, which is the span of S2. So,  18:13let us say, we choose the vector 1 3 3 and you  appended to S2 and you call the new set S3.  18:21So S3 is the set of vectors 3 0 0, 2 2 1 and  the vector 1 3 3. And now once again, we will  18:32sort of say that every vector x y z can be written  as a linear combination of these three vectors,  18:40and I will encourage you to work  out what the coefficients are  18:45by solving the corresponding  system of linear equations.  18:49If not, I have given the coefficients here and  you can check that this indeed works out.  18:55So, what is the point? The point is every  vector in R3 can be written as a linear  18:59combination of these three vectors. That  means the span of S3 is the entire R3,  19:06which means S3 is a spanning set for R3, which  now brings us to this idea of a basis.  19:12This is the main emphasis of this video, so  what is a basis? So, basis B of a vector space V  19:20is a linearly independent subset of V that spans  V, so it has two properties. One, that it spans  19:29V so it is a spanning set for V, and the other  is that it is a linearly independent set.  19:34Now, notice what is happening here.  Span, if you want something to span V,  19:41the idea is you keep adding elements. So, you  add as many elements as you like, you keep adding  19:48vectors and hopefully if you have enough  vectors, then they will be able to span V.  19:55Of course, we did this appending of vectors in  a very particular way. We kept choosing vectors  20:01which are outside the span of the previous few  vectors that we have chosen. So, because we did  20:08that, the new vector that we added was not a  linear combination of the original vectors,  20:16which meant it was linearly  independent, the sets that we  20:20keep obtaining are linearly independent sets. So, in fact, what we did in our previous  20:26examples was a method to not just find a  spanning set, but actually find a basis.  20:34So, there are two contradict, I mean, there are  two sort of opposite things happening here. One is  20:37that you would like this set to be a spanning set,  which means you would like it to be fairly large.  20:43On the other hand, you would like it  to linearly independent, which means  20:46you do not want it to be too large. Afterall, remember that, for example,  20:49if you have Rn then any set which has a  cardinality more than N, so N plus 1 or more  21:01is already linearly dependent. So, in RN, if  you want to have a basis, you would want it to,  21:07if you want it in particular to be linearly  independent it can have size at most N. On  21:12the other hand, for a spanning set you would  have you would want it to be very large.  21:20So, the basis is sort of an optimal middle. It  is both linearly independent and spanning. So,  21:26let us start with the most standard example.  And in fact, this is called a standard basis.  21:31So let ei belong Rn. We have seen this  example by the way in our previous examples  21:37of a spanning set. So, 1 0 and 0 1 is a  spanning set for R2 it is actually a basis  21:43and 1 0 0, 0 1 0 and 0 0 1 is a spanning set  for R3 it is actually a basis and both of them  21:52are what are called as standard basis and  this is a more, I mean, in more generality  21:57for any Rn, you can do the same thing. So ei be the vector with ith coordinate 1 and  22:05all other coordinates 0, for example, e1 is the  first coordinate is 1 and the other coordinates,  22:12all the other coordinates are 0 so 1 0 0, all the  way up to the nth coordinate, which is also 0.  22:20So, let us look at the set. Let us say capital  Epsilon, which is e1 e2 en this is a subset of Rn.  22:28And the claim is that this is a basis for Rn. So, let us try to see why that is the case. If  22:37you take – this is the same idea that we have  done for in the case of R2 and R3 which where we  22:42wrote it down. So, if you take anything of the  form x1 x2 xn, I can write this as x1 times e1  22:51plus x2 times e2 plus xn times en. So, it is a spanning set for Rn,  23:01so what we have proved is that the span of  this set Epsilon is Rn. On the other hand,  23:09these are clearly linearly independent because  if you take a linear combination, which is 0,  23:18but let us expand out this vector  in terms of coordinates.  23:21So, what does the ith coordinator, what is  jth coordinator? So jth coordinate of the  23:30left-hand side  23:34is aj, but for the right-hand side, the jth  coordinate is 0. That means aj must be 0 and for  23:43all j. That means it is linearly independent.  So, therefore, this is linearly independent.  23:53So that proves it is a basis. So, this  is called the standard basis for Rn.  23:58So, let us take a step back and ask, what  have we done in this video. We have seen that  24:04there is a notion of a spanning set, namely,  a set of vectors so that every vector can be  24:08written as a linear combination of these vectors,  so that is a spanning set for the vector space V.  24:15And then we have seen that there  is a notion called a basis.  24:18So, basis is a set of vectors, which is both  linearly independent and spanning. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.