---
title: "L8.5: Orthogonal transformations and rotations :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L8.5: Orthogonal transformations and rotations :: IITM Online Degree

L8.5: Orthogonal transformations and rotations

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the batch two component  of the online BSc program and data science  00:19and programming. This is a video on orthogonal  transformations and rotations. So, before I start  00:25the video, I want to sort of emphasize that this  is maybe not an extremely important video from the  00:33perspective of the data science course. But it is a useful video from a if you find  00:40mathematics interesting and certainly the idea  of rotations and so on which we are very close to  00:48given the material that we have covered so  far, are interesting even to people who do  00:53not particularly enjoy mathematics. So, in  some sense this video is for a general view  00:59of what kind of mathematics you can study using  linear algebra which we have studied so far.  01:06So, let us talk about orthogonal  transformations and rotations.  01:10So, let V be an inner product space and T  be are linear transformation from V to V.  01:16So, T said to be an orthogonal transformation,  if the inner product of Tv and Tw is the same as  01:24the inner product of v and w for all v and w and  in the vector space V. So, for any two vectors,  01:33you change them, you transform them using a linear  transformation T, then the changed the vectors  01:39maintain the inner product. So, the inner product does not change  01:45after the transformation, this is when you  will say that this transformation is an  01:51orthogonal transformation. So, what does it  mean for Rn, this is a main sort of intuition  02:01behind why we study orthogonal transformations.  So, in these Rn with the usual inner product,  02:07a linear transformation T Rn to Rn is  orthogonal, if it preserves angles and links.  02:13So, let us understand where this is coming  from. So, note that the inner product of  02:19two vectors in Rn, the usual inner  product, meaning that dot product  02:25is the norm of v times the norm of w times  cosine of the angle between these two  02:33vectors. So, now if you take these two sides,  you get Tv dot Tw is inner product of Tv sorry,  02:41norm of Tv times norm of Tw or we can say  the length of Tv times the length of Tw  02:48times cosine of the angle between Tv and Tw. And on the other side, we have the length of v  02:54times the length of w times the cosine of  the angle between v and w. So, now if the  03:01linear transformation preserves,  if these two are equal,  03:05so first of all, and they are equal, remember  for all v and w, so in particular, you can take  03:11v to be equal to w in that case, the two sides  will give you norm of Tv squared is equal to  03:17norm of v squared norms are always positive,  that is why norm of Tv is equal to norm of T.  03:22So, in other words, the lengths are the same.  After you apply T, the length of v remains  03:28unchanged. So, length of Tv is the same as length  of V. So, that means it preserves length.  03:34And now you apply it to the general situation of  v and w. So, you have length of v times length  03:40of w times the cosine of the angle between  them, the length of Tv times length of Tw  03:44times cosine of the angle between but length  of Tv is the same as length of v length of Tw  03:49is the same as length of w. And that is why on  both sides, you get only that the angle between  03:55Tv and Tw is equal to the angle between out cosine  of the angle between Tv and Tw is the same as  04:01cosine of the angle between a v and w. And that tells you that the angle between v  04:06and w is the same as the angle between our  Tv and Tw. So, it also preserves angles.  04:13That is why we have this this comment, so in  other words, orthogonal transformations are  04:20some very useful or interesting. They have some  interesting geometry, when we consider the usual  04:28inner product, namely the dot product. Here is a fact it is enough in the case of Rn  04:35to demand that the linear transformation preserves  length, so in that case, angles automatically get  04:40preserved. So, what we are saying is, since  this is for all v and w. So, if you take 3  04:50points and then after transformation they become  05:04like this, so the relative lengths are the  same. That means this length is also the same.  05:18And that will sort of force that the angle  does not change. So, this is the idea.  05:22I am not proving this. But it is a fact that I  think is very visually appealing. So, this is  05:28something you may be able to try and see. Let us see a very nice example of the,  05:38of this inaction. So, this is a video  created by our team. So, you look at the  05:44xy plane. And let us look at this T. So, the  T here is the identity. So, u is T times v,  05:52v is the vector in yellow. And if you apply  T, let us see how it changes. So, if your  05:59T is 0.5 0.87 etc. So, look at how your T is  changing, and the u is changing accordingly.  06:06So, when it is minus 1, on the  diagonal, it is the opposite vector.  06:13And then it comes back closer to v. And now you  are back. So, you can see that what happened here?  06:24These various different T's, maybe I let us  play this again. So, if you play it again,  06:30let us look at the T's again. So, u is T  times v, when T is the identity matrix,  06:38u is just equal to v, when u changes to 0.5  minus 0.87 0.87 0.5, you get changed. So,  06:48you can see that u is being rotated. So, the length is remaining the same.  06:53So, it is rotating on the same circle that  tells you that the length is remaining the same.  07:01So, the point here is that these T s that we  have all of them preserve length. And that is why  07:13they are orthogonal transformations. So, these  are examples of orthogonal transformations.  07:18So, this is the next slide, finding the rotation  matrix in the R2. So, what we saw were examples of  07:24what we call rotation matrices. So, they rotate  vectors. So, how do we find rotation matrices  07:30in R2, so consider the standard basis, e1 e2  rotate the plane by an angle theta, that is what  07:37we saw in the video. So, it was rotated by those  various angles. And corresponding to that angle  07:46that you rotated, there was a T there. So, we want to understand how to get  07:51the matrix corresponding to the rotation by theta.  So, if you rotate, then let us say you rotate by  07:57theta, then you get these vectors in red. So,  you drop the you drop perpendiculars to these  08:04to the axis so that we can write down what  are the coordinates of the vector. And  08:12what you can see is, so if this is theta, then  the opposite side, well, it is the hypotenuse.  08:19Since it is rotated, the hypotenuse is the  vector in red. So, rotation will not change  08:27the length, so the hypotenuse has length  1, this red thing has length 1.  08:34And this as a result has length sine theta,  and this as a result as length cosine theta.  08:41So, the coordinate of this point, or  the corresponding vector to this red  08:49line is cosine theta, because that is  the length that you get on the X axis  08:58when you drop the perpendicular or  project and on the Y axis, its sine theta.  09:06Similarly, if you do it for e2 the coordinate  you get are minus sine theta and cosine of theta.  09:18So, now we know how to write down  the corresponding matrix.  09:23Let T theta we are corresponding  linear transformation  09:26that is a linear transformation that you obtain by  rotating by theta, then we have seen T theta of 1,  09:330 is cosine theta sine theta and T theta  of 0, 1 is minus sine theta cosine theta.  09:39So, now if you want to express this as a  matrix meaning with respect to the standard  09:44ordered basis, then we just saw how to do it.  Namely, you take these coordinates for 1, 0  09:51and put it in your first column,  take these coordinates for  09:55the image of 01 and put it in your second column.  This we have seen in our previous videos.  10:03And notice here that R theta transpose is R  minus theta, and R theta transpose times R theta  10:13R theta times R theta transposes identity. And  note which we have seen earlier that then that  10:21since angles and length. Now, there is a typo  here, since angles and length are preserved,  10:29and the standard basis orthonormal, the rotated  vectors are also all orthonormal. Why? Why is that  10:35the case? Because the angle between these two  vectors cosine theta sine theta and minus sine  10:40theta, cosine theta is still 90 degrees. Because we just rotated.  10:48So, they are orthogonal to each other, and  the rotation will not change length. So,  10:531, 0 and 0, 1 have length 1. So, these  two basis vectors also have length 1.  11:03So, there you learn orthonormal basis of R2. So,  in other words, these columns that we have here,  11:08for R theta is an orthonormal basis to something  what thing and it is worth observing that  11:15that fact is exactly borne out by this identity  here, the R theta transpose times R theta is R  11:21theta times R theta transpose is identity.  So, I encourage you to check that.  11:27By the way, why is R theta transpose equal to R  minus theta. So, if you write down R minus theta,  11:33you get cosine of minus theta, but  well, that same as cosine of theta,  11:38sine of minus theta, which is  minus sine of theta. And then  11:46minus of sine theta, with sine of, minus  of sine of minus theta, which is minus  11:52minus sine theta which is just sine theta,  and then again, cosine of theta.  11:56So, this is exactly R theta  transpose. And now you can check that  12:03R theta transpose times R theta is R theta times  R theta transpose identity. So, the point here is  12:09when you apply R theta, you are rotating by theta,  when you apply R theta transpose, we just we have  12:14seen that that is the same as applying R minus  theta, which is the same as saying that you are  12:19rotating back by theta, you are rotating by  minus theta. So, rotate by theta rotate backed  12:25by minus theta, you will exactly get the identity  transformation. That is what this is seen.  12:31So, as I said, this video is  largely a fun video more to do with  12:36the geometry behind what is all going on. So,  let us look at rotations is R3. So, the rotations  12:44about the axes in R3 is the general rotations  are a bit more to this difficult to describe.  12:50Since, these clearly preserves angles and  distances and our linear transformations,  12:54if you rotate about the axis, then  suddenly this is a linear transformation.  13:00And it is clearly want to preserve lengths and  angles, this was what we also saw in R2.  13:07So, these are orthogonal transformations. So,  in the previous slide, we saw for R2, you could  13:14describe them by looking at the images of e1 and  e2 here, you have to look at the images of e1,  13:21e2, e3. So, if we consider the rotation about the  Z axis, and then e3 is unchanged, because if you  13:30look at the Z axis that you are rotating about  the Z axis, so the Z axis remains unchanged.  13:36So e3, which is a unit vector in the  Z axis direction, remains unchanged.  13:43And the xy plane gets rotated  exactly as in the previous  13:47slide. So, what we get is the corresponding matrix  looks like cosine theta minus sine theta 0 sine  13:55theta cosine theta 001. So, this is because we  are basically rotating only the xy plane.  14:01And if you followed that, then the same  idea will tell you that if you have the X  14:06axis which is fixed, and you rotate  about the X axis, so here is X Y Z,  14:14here is your X axis. So, you rotate like this  fate. So, if you do that, then you think of the yz  14:24plane and on the yz plane, you will get a cosine  theta minus sine theta sine theta cosine theta and  14:30then it will be a block diagonal with one  corresponding to the X Y X has been fixed.  14:38And then for the Y axis, similarly, you  have a one in the middle position and the  14:45minor corresponding that one or the matrix  corresponding to that one is cosine theta  14:51minus sine theta sine theta cosine theta.  So, I will encourage you to check this.  14:56And again, notice again, because of the previous  slides, that Ti theta transpose is Ti minus  15:02theta and Ti theta transpose Ti theta is Ti theta  transpose is identity for the same reason that we  15:10gave in the, R2 example. Let us do another example. So,  15:16this is a bit more involved to look at the linear  transformation, T from R3 to R3, given by X1, X2,  15:26X3 is one third X1 minus 2X2 plus 2X3 2X1 minus  X2 minus 2X3 and 2X1 plus 2X2 plus X3. Now,  15:35these coefficients should ring a bell in your  mind. But if they do not, we will anyway study  15:42what happens to the standard bases vector and  you will see that these are very familiar.  15:49So, if you evaluate e1, let us call  that V1, then you get one third,  15:55two thirds and two thirds. If you evaluate e2  let us call that V2, you get minus two thirds  16:02minus one third, two thirds. And if  you evaluate e3, then you get V3 which  16:11is two thirds minus two thirds and one  third. So, we have seen earlier that this  16:16is an ortho normal basis, this was exactly  the an orthonormal basis we produced in the  16:23gram Schmidt process video. So, the corresponding matrix is  16:30one third times 1 minus 2 2, 2 minus 1 minus  2, 2 2 1. So, where did this come from? So,  16:37the first column corresponds to V1,  the second column corresponds to V2,  16:41and the third column corresponds to V3, and  I just taken one third common outside which  16:48I can do, because its scalar multiplication. So, as V1, V2, V3 is an orthonormal set the linear  16:57transformation T is an orthogonal transformation.  Now, that needs a little bit of checking.  17:06So, what you have to do is, you have to take this  T X1, X2, X3 and you have to check that if you  17:16apply the norm on both sides. So,  if you take if you take norm of  17:24Tx, then this is the same as the norm of X. This  is what you want to check. And the claim is that  17:31if, if I happen to know that V1, V2, V3 is an  orthonormal basis, which in this case I do,  17:38then then that will be true. And the reason is this identity  17:44that A transpose is A transpose A is I3  I will suggest you check this identity,  17:52actually it is a very easy check, because  what happens is, when you do AA transpose,  17:58or A transpose A, really what you are getting is  in each place is the inner product of two of these  18:04basis vectors. So, when they are not equal, it  will be 0. And when they are equal, it will be 1.  18:09That is the main sort of reason we said  V1, V2, V3 is an orthonormal set.  18:17So, you obtain this and from here you can you  can get that norm of Tx is equal to norm of X,  18:24because when you apply norm, somewhere in there,  this these inner products will play a role.  18:31So, a square matrix is called an orthogonal  matrix. If AA transpose is A transpose A is  18:37identity, let me expand a little on  that comment. So, the idea is that  18:46when you are looking at norm of Tx, well,  you get in the product of Tx comma Tx.  18:57But here we are looking at this in the  product in terms of the usual dot product,  19:01so let us do it further dot product.  So, Tx dot with Tx, this is the same in  19:09terms of matrices as looking at Tx transpose  times Tx, which is the same as x transpose  19:16T transpose T times x, but T transpose T  is identities. So, you get x transpose x,  19:23which is norm of x. This is the main point that is  why we are demanding this thing here. I may have  19:35used bad notation and probably here,  when I went to matrices, I should have  19:43used A and not T just A, every T of x when you evaluate these X as a  19:57vector and R3, as in terms of its coordinates you  have to move to A. So, this is why it works. And  20:09so, an orthogonal matrix is AA transpose A  transpose is identity that is the reason we  20:16call such matrices as orthogonal matrices, because  when you use them to create linear transformations  20:22on Rn, then those linear transformations are going  to be orthogonal linear transformations.  20:28So, the take home from this video, I guess is that  20:32this notion of orthogonality is it is  a very geometric notion, it studies  20:39essentially the angles and in particular right  angles which, as we know since antiquity is  20:45something we have been very interested in then  there are beautiful theorems related to that.  20:52And this is some linear algebraic way of  studying the changes that take place when  21:00you apply a linear transformation to angles and in  particular, if they remain unchanged. Then these  21:10are some special linear transformations, and they  are called orthogonal linear transformations. Of  21:14course, you have also maintained distances so both  are inward. That is it for now. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.