---
title: "Week 08 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# Week 08 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree

Week 08 - Tutorial 01

Transcript Language

English

00:16Hello everyone, so in this video let us try to calculate projection of one vector on another00:22vector. So, let us begin with this example, suppose, I am taking a vector v which is 500:29comma 5 comma 5. So, this is a vector on R3. Now, suppose there is another vector u and00:41I am denoting it by 0 comma 5 comma 5. So, I am taking another vector on R3. And I want00:53to calculate the projection of vector u on v.00:57So, projection of vector u in the direction of v this one we have to calculate. So, in01:04the lecture we have seen the formula to calculate it, so, we have to calculate the inner product01:09of u and v, inner product of u and v, we also have to calculate the inner product of v and01:16v. And as we are calculating the projection in the direction of v, so we have to multiply01:22the vector v with this scalar.01:24So, as you calculate the inner product of u and v, you will get an scalar if we calculate01:30inner product v and v, we will get another scalar you have to multiply this scalar with01:36this vector to get the projection. So, let us calculate. So, what is inner product u01:44and v? So, inner product u and v which is same as inner product v and u obviously, so01:53it is given as, so it is nothing but the dot product.01:58So, we have two vectors here, 0 comma 5 comma 5, and 5 comma 5 comma 5. So, if we calculate02:10the inner product, if we calculate the dot product, so, we will get 0 into 5 plus 5 into02:185 plus 5 into 5. So, what do we get, we will get 0 plus 25 plus 25. So, will get 50. Similarly,02:31if you calculate inner product of v and v, the same vector, so you will get 25 plus 2502:41plus 25, which is 75.02:42So, the scalar you get here is u v by v v. So, this will give you 50 by 75. So, it is02:56nothing but 2 by 3. Now, in the direction of v, we have to calculate the projection.03:02So, our projection of u in the direction of v is nothing but 2 by 3 into our v. So, v03:15is 5 comma 5 comma 5. So, it is 10 by 3, 10 by 3 and 10 by 3.03:25So, geometrically what we are doing, we are starting with two vectors, suppose, this is03:36my v and this is my u. So, this is why u vector, this is my v vector and I am taking projection03:44of u on this vector. So basically, I am calculating this vector with this much magnitude in the03:52direction of v. So, this is the geometric representation of this. Now, let us try to03:57visualize this in GeoGebra.04:00So, this is r 3 we can see here, so at first we will take the vector v which is 5 comma04:065 comma 5, so this is the vector v. Now, where is the vector u? So, here is the vector u04:13which is 0 comma 5 comma 5. Now, we have to take the projection of u on v as we have calculated04:20it already. So, we can see that this will give us the projection on u in the direction04:31of v. So, as you can see, this vector along the rejection of v is the projection of u04:41on the direction of v. So, the dotted line basically gives us a perception how we calculate04:52the projection.04:54Now, if we change the this u and v we can see that this projection will also change.05:00So, now let us try to see this animation where do we change u and v all together and we can05:09see the projection is changing. So, in this animation we can see how the change of u and05:18v is changing the projection in the direction of v. So, this animation helps us to visualize05:31this projection. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.