---
title: "L7.4: Inner products and norms on a vector space :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L7.4: Inner products and norms on a vector space :: IITM Online Degree

L7.4: Inner products and norms on a vector space

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component  of the online course on data science.  00:22In this video, we are going to talk about  inner products and norms on a vector space.  00:26This is linked to our previous video which was on  length, angles and dot product. So, we will see  00:34that the notion of an inner product generalizes  what is a dot product and the notion of a norm  00:40generalizes what is the length. So, the point here  is that we can do this for any vector space.  00:47So, let us start by the, by defining what is an  inner product. So, an inner product on a vector  00:53space V is a function, which is, which takes  two vectors as input, so that is why the dot  01:01comma dot, so in place of the dots, you will have  vectors. So, it is a function from V cross V to R.  01:08So, it produces a real number. For each  pair of vectors, it produces a real number,  01:15and it satisfies the following. So, if you  take into, if you apply this to v comma v,  01:22that means you take just one vector, and  you think of it as the tuple v comma v,  01:29then the inner product of v with itself, that is  how we will say v comma v this angle brackets,  01:37this must be positive, strictly greater than 0  01:41if v is non-zero, and it will be 0,  precisely when v is equal to 0.  01:49And then you have these three things, which are,  which I have put together because they are called,  01:58this is saying that it is by linear. So,  these three things say it is by linear.  02:05So, v1 plus v2 is comma v3 is  v1 comma v3 plus v2 comma v3.  02:13And v1 comma v2 is v2 comma v1. And c times  v1 comma v2 is c times v1 comma v2, which  02:23because of your previous thing can be written  also as v1 comma c times v2, where c here is a  02:33real number, it is a scalar.  02:36So, I will also point out that using these  two, we can get that v1 comma v2 plus v3  02:45is equal to v1 comma v2 plus v1 comma v3, because  v1 comma v2 plus v3 is v2 plus v3 comma v1,  02:57which is then v2 comma v1 plus v3 comma v1, and  then you can flip those again to the other side.  03:07So, now, these three together  03:11are what is called bilinear. So, this is  a bilinear map, the first and third.  03:21So, a vector space together with an inner  product is called an inner product space. So,  03:26I will underline this. This is called an  inner product space. This is a definition.  03:32And I maybe I will just put in the conclusions we  do. So, the conclusions we do before where that,  03:39so first of all here, this is not a conclusion,  this is a hypothesis, c is a scalar. And the  03:44conclusion out of this was that v1 comma v2  plus v3 is v1 comma v2 plus v1 comma v3.  03:57So, the dot product is an example of an inner  product. This is what I started with. So,  04:02recall that the dot product of u and v in  Rn is u dot v is u1v1 plus u2v2 plus unvn.  04:09I apologize for this ugly looking full stop which  should have been here. And this is a function  04:20which is given by u comma v is u dot  v, angle brackets u comma v is u dot v.  04:26So, why is this inner product? So, we have to verify the three axioms,  04:31the four axioms we had. So, we know  already that if u comma u is, so this is u1  04:39square plus u2 square plus un square, for real  numbers squares must be positive, sum of squares  04:45is positive. So, that means this is greater  than 0 if u is not 0 and this is equal to 0  04:53exactly when each ui is 0. So, ui is 0 for  all i, which happens precisely when u is 0.  05:01So, we approved the first one. And the other three  just follow from the form of this equation.  05:10So, if you have u plus u prime dot v, you  can check that this is actually u dot v  05:18plus u prime dot v. And similarly, if you have u  dot v, this is same as v dot u that is clear from  05:25the equation, because real numbers you can,  they commute under multiplication. And then  05:36clearly if you have cu dot v, this is c times u  dot v because c multiplies into each component.  05:45So, for each component you will have it over there  and then you can take it out. So, this completes  05:52the proof that this is indeed a inner product.  So, the dot product is an inner product.  05:58So, let us now look at an example of an inner  product on R2, which is, this is not the standard  06:05inner product that we saw, the dot product  that we saw earlier. This is slightly different  06:09example. So, here is the definition, u comma v  is x1y1 minus x1y2 minus x2y1 plus 2 times x2y2,  06:23so where u is x1. This is a typo here. So, u  here is x1 comma x2 I think and v is y1 comma y2.  06:38So, the standard inner product that we saw  was, so if you do u dot v, u dot v is x1y1  06:47plus x2y2. So, sorry, in terms of, is  x1y1 plus x2y2. The inner product here  06:59is slightly different as you can see. So, why is this an inner product, how do  07:04I prove that? So, this is proved by looking at  the following. If you look at this expression,  07:11you can write down a matrix for this expression.  So, you have x1x2 and then you have y1y2.  07:24And then let us see. So, you have x1y1 the  coefficient is 1, x1y2, the coefficient is  07:37minus 1, I believe, this should be minus 1 here.  And then this is minus 1 and then this is 2. So,  07:44if you multiply this, let us see  what we get. You get exactly,  07:49so the first term is x1 minus x2, the second  term is minus x1 plus 2 times x2 times y1y2  08:01and if you work out what this is, this is x1y1  minus x2y1 minus y2x1 plus 2 times x2y2. So,  08:13this is exactly what we have up here. This  expression and this expression are the same.  08:19So, this is a different expression from the inner  product, which is x1y1 plus x2y2. And now how do I  08:27use this matrix form to conclude that it is an  inner product. So, the reason, so I can use a  08:35matrix form to calculate that this is an inner  product because the bilinearity part follows  08:40directly. And the symmetry part follows because  this is a symmetric matrix. So, if I want to do  08:49y1y2 comma x1x2, then you can see that this  is exactly writing y1y2 here, writing the same  09:00matrix here and x1x2, but this is a real number.  So, I can, so this is the same as its transpose.  09:07This is the same thing transpose. And if you  do the transpose, you will get this, because  09:14the matrix in the middle is a symmetric  matrix. So, its transpose is itself.  09:18So, that is why it is symmetric. That is the  second property. And then bilinearity is because  09:25matrix multiplication respects  addition. So, if you have,  09:30so it distributes over addition. So, if you  have x1x2, let us say, plus x1 prime x2 prime,  09:39then over here you will, that will distribute  and it will give you what you want. That is the  09:45first thing. And then c times x1x2 again because  constants come out of matrix multiplication,  09:53it will follow from there. So, I will urge  you to check that fact, because these two  09:58expressions are the same. So, the key point here  is these two expressions here are the same. So,  10:04maybe I will draw that better.  These two expressions are the same.  10:09So, you can check it from there. So, the only remaining thing is  10:15that this is always positive. So, if you  put x1x2 in place of y1y2 what do you ge?  10:23So, you get x1 square minus x1x2 minus or  rather plus x1x2 so that is 2 times x1x2  10:37plus 2 times x2 square, so this  is x1 square minus 2 times x1x2  10:44plus 2 times x2 square and you can write this  as x1 minus x2 square plus x2 square. So,  10:50this is a sum of square. Again, it must be  positive. If it is equal to 0, then both the  10:56terms which are squares are 0, that means  x1 minus x2 is 0 and x2 is 0. Once x2 is 0,  11:01x1 must be 0. So, both x1 and x2 are 0.  So, that tells us that it is 0 exactly when  11:09u is 0. So, this proves that it  is an inner product on R2.  11:17Let us define what is a norm. So, norm on a vector  space is a function. It is indicated by that  11:23double lines. And we have seen these double  lines in a previous, in the previous video,  11:30x goes to norm x, which satisfy  the following conditions.  11:36So, norm of x plus y is less than or equal to  the norm of x plus norm of y; norm of c times x  11:42is the absolute value of c times norm of x. So, remember, in the previous video this norm  11:49was supposed to represent length. So, since  it represents length, it better be positive.  11:54And so if you have, if you scale it, the length  better remain positive. That is what is being  12:00reflected here. So, positivity is coming in the  third axiom. Norm of x is always greater than 0.  12:09And it is 0 precisely when we are dealing with the  0 vector, if and only if the vector x is 0.  12:17So, let us recall the length of a vector. This  is the comment I made in the previous slide  12:21u. It is given by this expression root of  x1 square plus x2 square plus xn square.  12:28And this is actually a norm. So, we have to say  that the three previous conditions are satisfied.  12:37As I said, if you multiply this by c,  12:40this is clearly root of c square x1 square  plus c square x2 square plus c square xn  12:50square. And the c comes out but with an absolute  value. And the remaining part is norm of u,  12:59length of u. This should have been two bars. Let us see when this is 0. This is 0,  13:07we have actually checked this, so the length is  0 exactly when u is 0. This is something we know  13:14which leaves us with the triangle inequality.  Namely, if you take two vectors, u plus v,  13:22then you compute the sum. So, this is root of  13:27x1 plus y1 square plus x2 plus  y2 square plus xn plus yn square.  13:40And on the other hand, we have norm  of u plus norm of v, which is x1, root  13:48x1 square up to xn square. This is root y1  squared plus all the way up to yn square.  13:57So, I want to say that these, this  sum is less than or equal to that sum.  14:04And this is something that we know is true.  And I will maybe not do a proof of this.  14:12So, what you can do is you can square both  sides. If you square both sides, you will get  14:18x1 plus y1 square plus all the way up to xn  plus yn square. This side you get x1 square  14:19plus all the way up to xn square plus  y1 square all the way up to yn square  14:19and then plus 2 times this root and then y1  square plus all the way up to yn square.  14:49And then, so to compare these,  so I want to compare these. So,  14:53to compare these you can expand the brackets. If  you expand the brackets and you cancel off these  14:58square terms. You are going to have to compare 2  times x1y1 plus 2 times x2y2 plus 2 times xn yn  15:09with this side. And now I will  leave it at this point to.  15:15So, you can cancel out the 2s as well.  So, you can, you have to compare this term  15:21with this term here. And I will may be not  get into a proof that this is actually,  15:32this is less than or equal to that. It is a very,  something you can do. So, the length function is  15:39a norm on Rn. So,  15:49let us look at a norm on Rn which is different  from the length function. Namely, you can take  15:56the absolute values of the coordinates.  So, norm of u1, so this 1 is supposed to,  16:05I think this 1 has not come out the way I intended  it to be. This should have been the subscript,  16:12but it did not come out as far as I  wanted it. Anyway, so define norm of u  16:18to be this, the absolute value of x1 plus absolute  value of x2 plus absolute value of xn then this is  16:24a norm. So, let us check that this is a norm. So, first of all, I want to check that  16:31if norm u1 is 0, this is the third  axiom, what happens. Well, this is a  16:36sum of non-negative integers. So, this happens  exactly when each xi is 0 in absolute value,  16:43which is exactly happening when xi is 0 for all  i, which is exactly saying that u is equal to 0.  16:51So, if this norm is 0, if this function  is 0 on u, then u better be 0. And,  16:56of course, if the, if u is 0, then the function is  0. So, this is one thing that we have checked.  17:01The other is, if you multiply this by a  constant c, by a scalar, what happens. Well,  17:09each term is multiplied by c. So, I get this  expression. Excuse me, I should put in the dots,  17:19this expression. And I can take my c  out common, because remember that the  17:27absolute value of two numbers multiplied is  the absolute value of each multiplied. So,  17:32you take c out, absolute value of c out common and  you get x1 plus x2, all these in absolute value,  17:41so absolute value of x1 plus absolute  value of x2 all the way up to n which is  17:48the definition of the norm here. So, c times this  function. So, this gives you one more thing.  17:56And then the last one that we have to do is the  triangle inequality, which is saying that if you  18:01have u plus v, you take this. Well, let us write  that down, that is x1 plus y1 plus x2 plus y2  18:11plus xn plus yn, where xis are the coordinates  of u, yis are the coordinates of v.  18:19But we know that this is  less than or equal to x1 plus  18:23y1, this is less than or equal to x2 plus y2.  And then if you rearrange all these terms,  18:33you get that this is u1 plus v1.  18:41So, this tells you that it is a norm. So, it  is a fairly simple check that it is a norm.  18:48So, finally, let us explore the  relation between the inner product and  18:54the norm. So, suppose you have v which is an  inner product space, so it has an inner product  18:59which we have represented by these angle  brackets. Let us define this function.  19:05So, this function is norm of v is equal to  square root of the inner product of v with itself  19:12then the claim is that this is a  normal v. Let us work this out,  19:16why this is a norm. So, first of all, norm  19:20of v is 0. This happens exactly when the square  root of the inner product of v with itself is 0,  19:29which happens precisely when the inner product  itself is 0. But remember, it is an inner product.  19:34This happens precisely when v is 0. So, I  want to prove that this is always positive if  19:43v is non-zero, but remember that v  comma v is, so if v is not equal to 0,  19:52v comma v is greater than 0, that means square  root of v comma v is strictly greater than,  19:58we are always looking at the positive square  root, which means norm of v is strictly. So, the  20:06positive, non-negative and positive  part is proved, that axiom is proved.  20:15So, the other two axioms  are the triangle inequality.  20:19And if you multiply a scalar, what  happens? So, let us look at scalar.  20:23So, for the scalar, so we have c times  v, by definition this is cv comma cv.  20:32But as we know c comes out, so this is  root of c. So, it comes out of the first  20:38one and it comes out of the second one. So, c times c, excuse me, this is norm of v,  20:44inner product of v comma v. So, this is root  of c square, root of v comma v. The second part  20:52is exactly the norm of v and the first part  is mod of, meaning the absolute value of c,  21:00because you are taking root of c square. So, if  c is a negative number, after taking square root,  21:06you always look at the positive part. So, it  is the absolute value of c times norm of v. So,  21:12this is the another one of the axioms. And finally, we have, if you have v plus w,  21:21by definition this is v plus w comma  v plus w square root and this is,  21:31so you have four terms. You have v comma  w plus v comma, w comma v plus w comma w  21:44which if you rewrite this is v comma v and  this is remember its inner product. So, it is,  21:52so the first, we got the first thing by  bilinearity, and then, because it is symmetric, we  21:59get this is 2 times v comma w plus w comma w. So, let us square this.  22:09So, if you square this, you get v comma v  plus 2 times the inner product plus w comma w,  22:20but this is exactly norm of v square plus  norm of w square plus 2 times v comma w  22:33and this is less than or equal to norm  of v square plus norm of w square plus  22:462 times norm of v, norm of w. So, this needs a little bit of  22:54work. And then what you will get is  that this is norm of v plus norm of w  23:04the whole square. So, we have to prove  that norm of v plus w the whole square  23:11is norm of v plus norm of w is less than or  equal to norm v plus norm w the whole square.  23:17The only thing missing here is why is, this  thing less than or equal to this thing here.  23:25So, that needs a little bit of work which I  will skip for now. So, I guess this tells you  23:32the relation between inner products and norms.  So, the main point here is that once you have  23:36an inner product, it induces a norm. This is  what you have to keep in mind. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.