---
title: "L7.2: Affine subspaces and affine mappings :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L7.2: Affine subspaces and affine mappings :: IITM Online Degree

L7.2: Affine subspaces and affine mappings

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the maths 2 component  of the online BSc program on data science.  00:19In this video, we are going to talk about  Affine subspaces and Affine mappings.  00:24So, before we start the video, I want to say  that this video is not extremely essential to  00:31the general ideas in linear algebra  that we have been looking at.  00:38When it relates to data science, there  is only one really important, I mean,  00:41important concept which we should address, and  which is why we have to introduce this topic. So,  00:48I am going to be a bit brief in this video. And  the idea is that if you want to really learn more,  00:55you should read a little bit of the literature or  you can ask the tutors in the tutorial sessions.  01:03So, this is not really a very integral part of  the course, but there is one thing that we have  01:08to understand in this video, and I will mention  that when we come to it. So, let us look at Affine  01:14subspaces and Affine mappings. So let V be a vector space. So,  01:19an Affine subspace of V is a subset L, so  it is a subset menu it is not a subspace,  01:25such that, there exists V in V and a vector  subspace U in V such that L is literal v plus u.  01:35So, what does that mean? That means, you will  have to look at the set little v plus little u  01:41where little u varies over capital U. So, essentially, it is taking this  01:47subspace U and then shifting it by V meaning you  add the vector V to each vector in the subspace  01:55U. So, in particular, you added to 0 also.  So, because U is a subspace, so, that means,  02:020 must be in U, which means the  vector V must belong to this set L.  02:11So, any set L which can be obtained in this  fashion is called as Affine subspace of V.  02:17So, we say an Affine subspace is L n-dimensional  if the corresponding subspace U is n-dimensional.  02:25So, if U is n-dimensional L is  considered to be n-dimensional.  02:30So, the subspace U corresponding to an  Affine subspaces is unique, so what do we  02:34mean by that. This definition  for an Affine subspaces says that  02:40L is little v plus capital U, V is a vector U is  a Affine subspace. Maybe you could write it in a  02:48different way, as V prime plus U prime. And what this statement is saying is that,  02:56maybe you can write it in a different way, but  the U part must be the same. So, you can write  03:01it as V plus U and V prime plus U, so, that is  the only way to write it meaning there is no  03:10choice of subspace. So, the subspace that  you are shifting must be the same.  03:16And of course, there is this statement also  implies that, I mean, the fact that I made it  03:21only for U and not for V tells us that the vector  V can actually be chosen in a different way.  03:28In fact, it can be any vector in the set capital  in the Affine subspace capital L. So, let us let  03:39us, maybe ask why that is the case. So, if I can  write L as, so L is V plus U and V prime plus  03:50U prime how do I identify my set U prime? So, we just observed that both V and V prime  04:02belong to belong to L. So, V belongs to L, V  prime also belongs to L by the same reasoning.  04:13So, then what we can try and do is we can try  and look at how to express V prime in terms of  04:19V plus U and V in terms of V prime plus U  prime and that should sort of give the idea for  04:29why U is equal U prime. So, for example, if you take little u,  04:33so let little u belong to capital  U, then V plus U belongs to  04:45L so that means it belongs to V  prime plus U prime that means,  04:53V plus U is equal to V prime  plus some little u prime for some  05:04U prime in U prime, which implies  that U is equal to V prime minus V  05:19plus U prime. So, now the claim is that v prime minus V is in  05:27U and V, U prime both, and U prime is of course,  is in U prime, so that means, this little u will  05:34be in U prime. So, for every vector in U, it  will be in U prime, conversely it will be in  05:41every vector in U prime will be in U. So,  why is V prime minus V in U or U prime?  05:50So, let us look at V prime minus V and  let us look at how to write it in terms of  06:02V plus U. So, well we know V prime. Well, what  I meant to say is, we know V prime is in L  06:10that means V prime is equal to V plus some,  06:16let us say U1 where U1 is in U, that  means V prime minus V, excuse me,  06:28is equal to U1, which belongs to U. And you  can take the negative, so that will tell  06:34you also that V minus V prime belongs to U. And the same argument done for with V and V prime.  06:44The rules changed; we will say that V  minus V prime belongs to U prime. So,  06:50that implies that V prime minus V belongs to  U prime. So, that means, both of these vectors  06:56belong to U prime, but U prime is a  vector space, it is a vector subspace.  07:01So, that tells us U is in U prime and that  completes the argument that I was giving here.  07:07So, the main point here is if you can, if you  write it as V plus U and V prime plus U prime,  07:11then the U and U prime must be the same. So,  that is what this statement here is saying.  07:17And V is not unique. In fact, as we as,  it can be any vector because you can add  07:25some vector of U to V and  express that as your V.  07:32So, the point here is that Affine subspaces  are translates of vectors of space of V. So,  07:38Affine subspaces are translates of a vector  subspace of V. So, the main thing here is that,  07:46if you have L is equal to V plus U and V prime  plus U prime, then V minus U prime belongs to U,  07:56and U prime, and using this you can claim that U  is equal to U prime, that is the thing here.  08:03And for the other one, you can just  take any vector in U and add it to V,  08:08and that will play the role of V prime. So,  V is not unique. So, Affine subspaces are the  08:14translates a vector subspace of V. So, you take  this U, and then you translate it by V.  08:20So, let us look at a few nice videos that our  team has made to explain this idea clearly. So,  08:29this is a video in R2, so let us first draw the  axis. So, once you have the axis, let us draw  08:35this vector U. This should have been labeled V and  not U. This is literally v and not little u, and  08:48this is your subspace U, which is a line and then  you translate it and that gives you your space L,  08:58so that is your new space L. So, this is an Affine  space. So, this is an Affine subspace of R2.  09:08Let us maybe view another video in our R3.  So, in time again, let us draw the axis.  09:31And that is your origin and then you draw  point, you connect that so that is your vector,  09:38so this vector is being called V. And then  you have a subspace this time it is the X,  09:45Y axis and then you shift it parallelly so that  it contains this vector V, so it is a translate of  09:52the X, Y axis so that it contains the  vector V that is this point V, that is what  10:00this video is showing. So, I hope you have  understood the concept of a Affine subspace.  10:06So, Affine subspaces are really not particularly  hard they are just translates of subspaces that  10:16we have studied all along. So, you take  a subspace and you move it. So let us  10:23put down what are the possible Affine subspaces  in R2. So, in R2, you can look at points,  10:29because you take the origin, remember,  the origin 0,0, is a subspace of R2,  10:35and then you can shift this by any vector V. So, you take R2, the origin in R2 0,0 and you  10:41shift it by V, so you do V plus 0,0 and  that gives you a point namely the point  10:46corresponding to V, and V can be anything,  so it covers all possible points in R2. So,  10:51every point in R2 is an Affine subspace of  R2. Similarly, we just saw the video about  10:57the first video about R2 where you had a line  passing through the origin, so that is a subspace,  11:02and then you translated it and that gives you a  line maybe not passing through the origin.  11:09So, that is an Affine subspace,  and then the entire plane R2.  11:14So, of course, there is nothing that rules out  the entire plane from being an Affine subspace,  11:21because in particular, every vector subspace is  an Affine subspace, you could take that vector  11:26little v to be 0, so you, then you will get L  to be 0 plus capital U, which is just capital U.  11:32So, it could be in particular an actual vector  subspace. So, R2 is a vector subspace of R2,  11:39so indeed it is a fine subspace as well. So, let us also write down an example of  11:45something which is not an Affine subspace. So,  Affine subspace is as we saw they are shifts of  11:52vectors of spaces linear subspaces. And  linear subspaces or vector subspaces. So,  11:59those are always either the origin 0, 0 or lines  passing through the origin or the entire R2.  12:10So, if you have a curve, which is not a line.  So, for example, if you take the parabola  12:14y is x squared plus 1 or you take a curve  like y squared is x cube, if you have not  12:20seen these curves, I would recommend that  you try to draw how these looks like,  12:25but they look curved, like this or like this,  and they are not, so of course, they cannot be  12:32the translates of lines or planes or points.  So, these are not Affine subspaces.  12:41So, let me write down here. So, if you have a  point, so if I take x y, if I take this point,  12:49then how is it a subspace? So, this is my L. So,  this is L, then this is the vector x y plus the  13:04vector subspace 0, 0. And if you have a line,  then in this case, well how do I write lines?  13:12Well, there is many ways  of representing lines.  13:15One is, maybe you have Y is mx plus  c and this line is a translate of  13:29Y is equal to mx. So, how do I convert this into  13:35the form that I want? So, here you have to  notice that the point 0 comma c is in L,  13:45and that is exactly the point that you are  shifting by. So, you write this L as 0 comma c  13:52plus the subspace U, where U is  given by all points of the form  14:00x comma mx where x belongs to R. So, this is a line, this is a line passing  14:11through the origin, so this is your subspace  vectors subspace U, so you have written L  14:16as 0 comma c plus this vector and this vector  subspace. So, here this is your vector little v.  14:24And the entire plane as I said, you can just write  this as R2 is 0, 0 plus R2, this is your U this is  14:34your little v, and this is your L. So, we have  expressed each of these in the form that that we  14:43need to in order for the definition to work.  14:47Let us ask the same question for R3, what are  the Affine subspaces of in R3. So, I think by  14:52now you probably have a guess about what the  answer is. You have points, you have lines,  14:58you have planes, yeah, this is something  new. We did not have this in R2 because  15:02there is only one plane the entire space in  R2, and then we have the entire space R3.  15:09So, what is let us also write down how  any two-dimensional Affine subspace  15:17in R3 can be expressed. So, two-dimensional  Affine subspace means a plane, because it is  15:25two-dimensional means you are translating a  plane. So, then it can be written as L is V  15:33plus lambda 1 V1 plus lambda 2 V2 where the lambda  is in R, and V, V1 and V2 are vectors in R3.  15:41So, V is the vector that was used in  the definition of L is equal V plus U.  15:46And what is U, U is exactly this part. So,  this is, this part is U, so U is equal to  15:53lambda 1 V1 plus lambda 2 V2. So, in other words,  it is the span of V1 and V2. This is a span of  16:06V1 comma V2 that is what is U. So, I mean, if we use the same idea then points  16:16can be written as V plus lambda times 0, 0 and  then lines can be expressed as V plus lambda times  16:25some vector on that line. So V1, and planes as we  have seen is V plus lambda 1 V1 plus lambda 2 V2,  16:36and the entire space R3 is just lambda 1  V1 plus lambda 2 V2, plus lambda 3 V3.  16:46If we want to do the same idea for the case of R2,  we would have V plus lambda times 0,0 and then V  16:54plus lambda times V1. And then the third one would  be just lambda 1 V1 plus lambda 2 V2, because that  16:59is the entire space it is only two-dimensional.  So, I hope this gives you an idea of how to of  17:09what are Affine subspaces and also the equations,  the kinds of equations which govern them.  17:15So, now this is the most important point about  why we want to study Affine subspaces at all.  17:20That is because we, this particular example of  the solution set to a system of linear equations,  17:27is an Affine subspace. So, let Ax equals b be  a linear system of equations. And I want to  17:34pointedly add that I am not, I mean, this need not  be homogeneous, and that is really the point.  17:40If b is 0, then this is a homogeneous system.  And we have seen before that the solution set  17:46is a subspace of Rn, suppose this matrix  is m by n, so this is a subspace of Rn.  17:53So, we call that subspace the null space of A,  the null space of A is exactly the solution set to  18:01this system of linear equations, Ax equals  0. So, this is in the case where b is 0.  18:08If b is not in the column space of A, so in  this case, Ax equals b does not have a solution.  18:16Because if b is not in the column space, that  means no linear combination of the columns can  18:21equal b. If there was a linear combination which  equal b, then it would be in the column space,  18:27so no linear combination can equal b, and that  precisely means that there is no solution.  18:33So, this solution set is the empty set.  18:37So, these two cases we have seen before and  we know exactly how these two cases behave.  18:44And what we want to do in this video specifically  is address the third case. Suppose b lies in the  18:50column space of A if b is 0, then we are back in  case one, so nothing to do. So, if b is not 0,  18:59then how do I deal with it, then it need not be a  vector subspace. In fact, it will not be a vector  19:04subspace, but it will be an Affine subspace. In this case, the solution set L is an Affine  19:12subspace of Rn. And how do we describe it, it can  be described as L is v plus n of A. What is this  19:20n of A, n of A is exactly this n of A that was  here the null space. So, you have to translate  19:29the null space by a particular solution.  So, you can take any particular solution  19:35and using that you translate the null space and  the space that you obtain the Affine subspace  19:42is exactly their set of solutions. So, the main mantra you have to take back here is  19:48the solution set of a non-inhomogeneous or a  non-homogeneous system is an Affine subspace.  19:57And specifically, the way to write it down is get  a particular solution, translate the null space  20:04and whatever you get is the entire set of  solutions for the inhomogeneous system.  20:13Now, let us come to the final thing that we want  to deal with in this video. This is a slightly  20:19complicated notion, but we are we are just doing  this for the sake of completeness. And one small  20:25idea. Let L and L prime be Affine subspaces of V  and W respectively. So, we have seen how to define  20:33the notion of a linear transformation. So, now suppose, so linear transformations work  20:38between vector spaces or vector subspaces. So now,  suppose we have Affine subspaces, we would still  20:46like to know how to deal with functions on those,  which in some sense, preserve the structures  20:57that we are interested in. So, how do we do that?  So, that is the idea of an Affine mapping.  21:03So, let L and L prime be Affine subspaces of V and  W respectively. Let f, L to L prime be a function.  21:11Consider any vector V in L and the unique subspace  U contained in V such that L is V plus U. So,  21:19we know that L is equal to V plus U. So, note that  a f of V in L prime lies in L prime and hence L  21:29prime is f of V plus U prime where U prime is the  unique subspace of W corresponding to L prime.  21:39Then f is an Affine mapping from L-to-L prime, if  the function g that you obtain from U-to-U prime  21:47defined by g of U is equal to f of U plus  V minus f of V is a linear transformation.  21:54So, for a linear transformation T, U to U prime  and fixed vectors V in L and V prime in L prime  22:01an Affine mapping can be obtained by defining  f of V plus U is equal V prime plus T of U.  22:08So, here basically what you are saying is put f  of V equals V prime and then for any other vector  22:16or any other point on this Affine subspace U,  you look at V plus U, there is some U such that  22:28you have that point or vector V plus U,  then you look at V plus U and define f of V  22:35plus U to be V prime plus T of U, then this is  kind of saying that it is linear. And in fact,  22:44every fine mapping is obtained in this way. So, we have g of U f of U plus V minus f of  22:50V. So, g of U is f of U plus V minus f of V.  What does it mean for g of for this g to be a  23:01linear transformation? So, I want that. So, let  us also look at some other thing g of U prime.  23:09So, the f f U prime plus V minus f of V.  So, I want that g of I am trying to explain  23:17what this statement means. So, I want that g of U plus U prime is equal to  23:28I want this, is this equal to g of U plus g of U  prime. This is what I want. One of the things that  23:35I need for it to be a linear transformation.  Let us unravel this definition. First of all,  23:40what is g of U plus U prime? By definition, this  is f of U plus U prime plus V minus f of V.  23:52So, let us put all these in here. This means that  f of U plus U prime plus V is minus f of U, V  24:01is equal to f of U plus V minus f of V plus f of U  prime plus V minus f of V. I can cancel both sides  24:14minus f of V. So, if I do that, what  I get is f of U plus U prime plus V  24:21is equal to f of U plus V plus f of U prime  plus V minus f of V, and then I can take that  24:31f of U on the other side. So, I get f of U plus  U prime plus V plus f of V is equal f of U plus V  24:41plus f of U prime plus V. So, you can see  here what is going on. You are taking U plus  24:47U prime plus V. And then you look at it as U  plus V, U prime plus V, there is an extra V  24:57over there. So that extra V you get in here. So, suppose you take T of x comma y comma z,  25:06to be maybe I should not have used T, let us call  F, maybe, since I am using T in the previous slide  25:11for a linear transformation. So, let T of x,  y, z be 2x plus 3y plus 2, 4x minus 5y plus 3,  25:20this is not a linear transformation. Why  is that? Because if you look T of 0, 0,  25:240 then it becomes 2 comma 3. And we know if it  is a linear transformation, it would have been  25:300 comma 0, so this is not a linear transformation,  but this is an Affine transformation.  25:36And how do I know it is an Affine transformation.  The reason I know it is an Affine transformation  25:42is because I can write this as T of x, y,  z is equal to 2 comma 3 plus 2x plus 3y  25:55comma 4x minus 5y, and this is indeed a linear  transformation. This is a linear transformation,  26:03and this is your vector of V prime. This  is what the second line in that slide,  26:10the previous slide said. So, this is why  I know it is a linear transformation.  26:16So, this is a general phenomenon. Namely,  if you have a linear transformation, you can  26:22and some fixed vector W and W, then the mapping T  prime of V is W plus T of V is and Affine mapping  26:30from V to W, this is exactly what I did here.  Let us just see what I did here, what I did is,  26:36I took this T of x, y, z, which unfortunately  this I could have called this T prime or F.  26:43So, T prime of x, y, z is can be written as  2 comma 3 plus 2x plus 3y comma 4x minus 5y,  26:53as I explained, you take this to be T of x, y,  z so this is indeed a linear transformation.  27:01So, this is a linear transformation.  27:05And this is your vector W, in here, so this  is exactly what you are doing below. And  27:13this is an Affine mapping as a result. So, essentially what we are saying is,  27:18this looks very much like a linear  transformation, but you can shift it by a  27:22vector. And here, for example, you shifted it by  2 comma 3, so, usually we will have to find out  27:28what that vector is and that vector can often  be found or always be found by looking at T of  27:34the 0 vector. If it is in this  form where you have it from V to W,  27:40then you can just look at what is T of 0, the 0  vector, and that will tell you what to shift by,  27:46what to translate by, that is the idea. So, let us recall what we have done in this video.  27:52In this video, we have studied the notion of an  Affine subspace, which is nothing but taking a  27:58usual vectors subspace and translating it by some  vector V. The most important example that we saw  28:07is the case of the solution set of a  homogeneous or in-homogeneous system  28:15of linear equations, which have a solution. If you are, if X you are looking at AX equals  28:21B and B and this does not have a solution at all,  then of course it is the solution set is the empty  28:27set. So, there is nothing, there is no mathematics  to do over there. But if it has a solution,  28:32then we know exactly what the solution  set of solutions looks like.  28:36You take a particular solution, and then you  take the null space, and translate it by that,  28:42that is how we, that is how we look at. That is  an example of an Affine subspace. And then we  28:50looked at Affine mappings, which are very similar  to what we do for linear transformations, but you  28:55allow a translation again that is essentially  what we have done in this video. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.