---
title: "L7.3: Lengths and angles :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L7.3: Lengths and angles :: IITM Online Degree

L7.3: Lengths and angles

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online degree program on data science.00:21In this video, we are going to talk about the notion of lengths and angles. So, some00:26of this may have already been seen in Maths 1 in some form and some of this may be really00:31easy and something you have seen before. But let us recall quickly what is the notion of00:37lengths and angles.00:40So, let us talk about the dot product of two vectors in R2. So, consider the vectors, let00:47us start with an example. So, consider the two vectors, 3, 4 and 2, 7 in R2. So, the00:52dot product of these two vectors gives us a scalar as follows, scalar is a real number.00:57So, you have 3 4 dot with 2 7. This is, so you take the first components of each of these01:04vectors, multiply them. You take the second components of each of these vectors, multiply01:09them, and you add them. So, this is going to give you 3 times 2 plus 4 times 7. So,01:15this is 6 plus 28, which is 34.01:16Let us generalize this to any two vectors in R2.01:24So, if you have x1, y1 and x2, y2 in R2, the dot product of these two vectors is the scalar01:31real number computed as follows; x1, y1 dot x2, y2 is x1 times x2 plus y1 times y2. So,01:38you multiply the first components, you multiply the second components, and then you add those.OK01:48So, let us now ask what is the length of a vector in R2? So, let us consider 3, 4, which01:58we saw in the previous example while computing dot products. So, if you want to compute the02:04length of this vector, how do, what do we do? Well, we use the Pythagoras theorem. So,02:13you drop a perpendicular down to, let us say, the x-axis.02:17So, then if you do that, you can get, you get a right angled triangle. So, using this02:25right angled triangle, so this is the right angled triangle. And because this is a right02:31angled triangle and the, since you have dropped a perpendicular, this length here is 3, this02:38length here is 4, this is the x coordinate, this part is a y coordinate.02:48And so if you want to compute the length of the red line, that is the length of the vector,02:52you use Pythagoras theorem, which says that the length of the vector 3 comma 4 is the02:57square root of, so the hypotenuse squared is equal to the sum of the squares of the03:03sides that is a Pythagoras theorem. So, the length of the hypotenuse is square root of03:11the sum of the squares of the sides.03:14So, in this case, it is square root of 3 square plus 4 square, square root of 9 plus 16 is03:2025\. So, square root of 25 is 5. And we do not know here what units we are doing it in.03:25So, whatever units we are doing it in. So, if this one is corresponding to centimeters,03:30it is in centimeters, if one is corresponding to kilometer, it is in kilometers, if one03:34is corresponding to miles, it is in miles and so on, so whatever units are being used03:38for drawing this R2.03:41So, the units is not important as far as this course is concerned. Of course, if you start03:47doing physics and so on that matters or if you do real life problems, it matters. So,03:59the main point here is that you have to remember that this, if you do a general x, y maybe04:04we can do it right here, if I have x comma y, so if I have something like this, this04:11you drop a perpendicular here, this represent, this is exactly x and this part is exactly04:20y. So, it gives you a right-angled triangle. And so the length of this vector, if I call04:26this vector v, so v which is x comma y, its length is square root of x square plus y square.04:37So, this is really what we are seeing here.04:41OK. So, observe that, let us link this up with dot products. Observe that 3 comma 404:48dot 3 comma 4 is 3 square plus 4 square, which we saw was the exactly what was in the square04:56root part when we computed length. So, the length of 3 comma 4 is the square root of05:02the dot product of the vector with itself. So, the length of the vector 3, 4 is square05:06root of 3 comma 4 dot 3 comma 4, which is square root of 3 square plus 4 square, which05:13is, this is unfortunately wrong. This is root of 25, which is 5. OK.05:23So, in general, of course, this is what I just said. The length of the vector is, so05:30the length of the vector is root of x square plus y square, which is exactly what you get05:36by doing root of x comma y dot with x comma y and here, as I said, this should be root05:4525 is 5. So, the length of the vector is given by taking square root of the dot product with05:54itself. This is the take home. So, the length and the dot product are related in a very06:01intimate fashion.06:04Let us look at the angle now. So, the other thing we want to study in this video is angles.06:08So, the angle between two vectors u and v, so this is a measure of, sorry, this is not,06:13there is no and here. The angle between the vectors u and v measures how far the direction06:19is of v from u. So, if you have the angle, this will be a small angle, as compared to06:27this, which is a large angle. So, in our previous picture or well, so there is a picture coming06:35up.06:36So, we have our old friend, 3 comma 4, and we have another vector 1 comma 5. So, the06:44angle is this thing theta here. So, it measures how far in terms of directions these two vectors06:52are from each other, so how far the directions of these vectors are from each other. Now,06:57we have seen this idea of directions and lengths which we called magnitudes in our very first07:06video on vectors, so just recall that if you do not remember.07:12So, the angle is measured in degrees or radians. So, if it is in degrees, it is between 0 and07:18360\. So, 0 is itself. And as you increase and go up to 360, it comes all the way back07:25and then 360 is again itself. So, this is like a clock. If you have 9 am and 9 pm, the07:33clock shows you the same thing, but 12 hours away lab, so that is what this 360 is saying.07:39If, 360 means you have taken around and come back. But as far as the angle is concerned,07:45it is 360 and 0 are telling you the same things.07:49Or it is, it can be measured in terms of radians. So, radians is more of a, it has something08:01to do with the length of the arc. So, that is measured between 0 and 2 pi. So, again,08:080 is like this, meaning they are the same. And 2 pi is when you go all round and come08:13back. So, just pi which is 2 pi by 2, so half of 2 pi is where they are like this. So, the08:19two vectors are parallel to each other, but pointing in different directions, like the,08:29from the center of the earth, the North Pole and the South Pole. They are in different08:32directions.OK So, it is measured in degrees or radians.08:38So, this also tells you what is the relationship between degrees and radians, because 2 pi08:44radians is equal to 360 degrees. So, from there you can say, in general, if you have08:49an angle of theta degrees, what should be the corresponding radians. The angle is often08:57described by computing or measured, maybe we should say, by computing its trigonometric09:03functions described or I want to say or measured by computing its trigonometric functions,09:13so which is sine, cosine, tan, etc.09:15What is the relation between dot product and angles? So, if you have two vectors in R2,09:21we can compute the angle between which, let us call it theta, between the two vectors09:28by using dot products as cosine of theta is u dot v divided by square root of v dot v09:35times u dot u. So, this times is these are real numbers, remember. So, this is just multiplication09:41in real numbers. So, and then you can take the inverse cosine. And we usually think of09:51it as being between 0 and 2 pi again.09:55So, let us do an example. So, consider the two vectors. So, this is in R3. So, now, we10:05are talking about R3. So, consider the two vectors 1, 2, 3 and 2, 0, 1 in R3. So, the10:10dot product of these two vectors gives us a scalar as follows. So, 1, 2, 3 dot with10:152, 0, 1 is you take component wise multiplication and then you add them. So, 1 times 2 plus10:222 times 0 plus 3 times 1, which is 2 plus 0 plus 3, which is 5. So, for two general10:28vectors, you do the same thing x1, y1, z1, x2, y2, z2 you do x1, y1, z1 dot x2, y2, z210:34is x1x2 plus y1y2 plus z1z2.10:36So, now, let us find the length of the vector, let us say, 4, 3, 3 in R3. So, to do this10:47we will first draw the xyz plane. So, let us say this is x, y and this z. This is our10:55right handed coordinate system. Sorry t his is not y, this is y and that is z. So, now,11:04if you take x, y, z, you drop a perpendicular, so this is 4, 3, 3.11:10So, we will drop a perpendicular down to the xy plane, then join that to the origin, and11:22then drop further perpendiculars from this point to the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively.11:31So, what you really have is that this is a perpendicular, this is exactly z. So, in this11:36case, it is 3. This is 3. And then this is exactly the length of y which is again 3,11:45the y-coordinate. And this is 4 or, because this is parallel to this, which is 4, this11:54is parallel to this, which is 3, and this is parallel to this, which is 3.11:59So, now how do I compute the length? Again, you use Pythagoras theorem. We already know12:06that this line in the middle here, this line you can compute by Pythagoras theorem as square12:19root of 3 square plus 4 square, this is root of 5 square which this 5. And then again,12:27this is the right angle triangle, the green thing, the blue line and the red vector itself.12:32So, the red, blue and green form of right angle triangle and the red is the hypotenuse,12:38which is exactly the length of the vector 4, 3, 3.12:42So, length of 4, 3, 3 is root of 5 square, which is the length of the line circled by12:52the green line, plus 3 square, which is the length of the blue line. But 5 square, I can13:04write as 3 square plus 4 square, which was the original x and y coordinates. So, this13:10is 3 square plus 4 square plus 3 square or maybe we should write it as 4 square plus13:173 square to keep with the notation, and then you can compute what that is, in this case,13:21it gives you root 34 units, so 16 plus 9 plus 9.13:28So, observe again that 4, 3, 3 dot 4, 3, 3 is exactly 4 square plus 3 square plus 3 square.13:35So, the length of 4, 3, 3 can be expressed as the square root of the dot product of the13:40vector with itself. This is the same computation. And so the general situation is where you13:48do x, y, z and the same reasoning tells you that the length of x, y, z is square root13:53of the dot product of x, y, z with itself. So, we, so this tells you the relationship14:00between the dot product and lengths in, so we have seen the same relation in R2, we have14:05seen this in R3 and certainly the idea is that this holds for any Rn, the proof is the14:11same.14:12Let us now ask for what happens to the angle. So, the angle between two vectors u and v14:18in R3 is the angle between them computed by passing a plane through them. So, if you have14:23two vectors u and v, you look at, there is a unique plane passing through those two vectors.14:28Draw that plane. And now once you are in the plane, it is like you are in R2. And in R214:33we know how to compute the angle between two vectors.14:37And it, so what does this angle do? It measures the direction, how far the direction is of14:43v from u or u from v on that plane.OK So, we have seen this formula before in R2 and14:54the same idea holds for R3. So, if u and v are two vectors in R3, we can compute the15:01angle theta between these vectors by using the dot product as follows. So, cosine of15:07theta is u dot v divided by square root of v dot v times u dot u or you can write thetha15:16in terms of the inverse cosine of this number that we have just seen.15:20So, let us maybe try to analyze why this is happening. So, the reason this is happening15:29is because, so if you have two vectors, so you pass some plane through them, I mean,15:42there is a unique plane. So, you take this plane. And now on this plane, these vectors15:50are like two ordinary vectors in R2. So, if you want instead of looking at this plane15:56you move this plane, rotate it, so that it becomes like the xy plane. And don't disturb16:07those vectors. When you just do a rotation don't do any scaling or anything else, just16:12do a rotation.16:13So, then these vectors are going to look like, on the xy plane they will maybe look like16:19this. And you can compute the angle between them. And that is exactly what this angle16:23is. And you can see that this will match with the formula that you have written down. That16:29is the idea.16:31So, let us compute the angle theta between these two vectors, 1, 0, 0 and 1, 0, 1. If16:36our intuition is correct, we kind of know what the angle here is. Both of these are16:41on the plane, the xz plane, y is 0, so xz plane. So, these are on the xz plane. And16:49on the xz plane, so you just knock out the y coordinate, so on the xz plane, this is16:55like 1, 0 and 1, 1. So, it is 1, 0 and 1, 1. So, if you think of the xz plane now as17:05the xy plane this is 1, 0 and 1, 1 and we know how much the angle is. This angle is17:11exactly 45 degrees or pi by 4 radians, whichever you prefer.17:18So, let us see if the answer that we get by doing that computation is the same 1, 0, 017:25dot 1, 0, 1 is 1, 1, 0, 1 dot 1, 0, 1 is 2, 1, 0, 0 dot 1, 0, 0 is 1. And so, we get theta17:36is cosine inverse of 1 by root of 2 times 1, which is root 2, which is as we know, is17:45pi by 4 radians or 45 degrees. So, this last thing is something we are getting from a cosine17:50table. You can look those up.17:53So, let us look at this second example, the angle between 1, 0, 0 and 1, 1, 1. So, for18:031, 0, 0 and 1, 1, 1, let us compute these numbers, 1, 0, 0 dot 1, 1, 1 is 1, 1, 1, 118:13dot 1, 1, 1 is 3, which is what is giving that root 3 and 1, 0, 0 dot 1, 0, 0 is 1.18:23So, we get cosine inverse theta, which is the angle between the two is cosine inverse18:28of 1 by square root of 1 times 3, which is cosine inverse of 1 by root 3 and you can18:38look up a table to get what the exact value is. It is something like 54 degrees, if I18:45remember right.18:47OK and now we can do the general idea of, make the general definition that is, if you18:53have two vectors, u and v in Rn, the dot product is defined as component wise multiplication19:00and then addition, so u1v1 plus u2v2 plus unvn. The length of the vector is, it is denoted19:06by this two bars. So, it is called a norm, which we are going to study in the next video.19:15So, it is given by root of u dot product with itself. And the angle between two vectors,19:24again, you pass a plane through those two vectors, there is a unique plane passing,19:29and you can then rotate it so that it becomes parallel, it becomes the xy plane and then19:38you can measure, and it turns out that this is exactly the same as doing cosine theta19:43is u dot v divided by norm of u times norm of v, which, in other words, is square root19:50of v dot v times square root of u dot u. And then you can write it in terms of the inverse.19:57So, we we actually have seen a little bit this before lengths and angles in our video20:02on vectors. But this is a reminder and it also is a reminder about what are dot products20:10and how they help in computing the lengths and angles between vectors. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.