---
title: "L2.5 Row reduction :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L2.5 Row reduction :: IITM Online Degree

L2.5 Row reduction

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the Maths 2 component  of the online BSc course on Data Science.  00:19In this video we are going to study something  called Row Reduction. So if you remember what we  00:25did last video at the row echelon form. We looked  at up when matrices are in row echelon form.  00:33And we saw that it is easy to solve equations when  the coefficient matrix is in row echelon form.  00:39So what we are going to do in this video  is to somehow see if we can reduce matrices  00:47into the reduced row echelon form. So what are the contents of this video;  00:54what are elementary row operations? We have  actually seen this before when we studied  00:58determinants, but we are going to formalize them.  Reducing any matrix to reduced row echelon form  01:04using elementary row operations. And then  computing the determinant this is an application  01:10using row reduction. So this technique  of reducing is called row reduction.  01:14And one application we will give in this  video is we will compute the determinant.  01:20So let us start by asking what  are elementary row operations.  01:24So I want to, this has a table and I am going to  on the left I will describe the action which is  01:29the elementary row operation. And on the right we  will have an example and you will also figure out  01:36what is the notation for the corresponding action.  So the first elementary row operation, so this is  01:41called of type 1. So elementary row operation of  type 1 is that when we interchange two rows.  01:47So here is the example, so you look at this  matrix 3 2 1 1, 1 1 0 0, and 0 7 1 1 and  01:56we can interchange the first two  rows. So the notation for this is  02:00R1 and R2 get interchange so we draw this two  headed arrow or as the arrow on the both sides  02:09on the left hand and the right. And then  we interchange the rows 1 and 2 and we  02:15obtain the matrix on the right. Then there  is an elementary row operation of type 2.  02:22So that is scalar multiplication  of a row by a constant t.  02:27So for example in this the same example  as before we divide R1 by 3 or we can  02:36equivalently think of that as multiplying the  first row by 1 third. So what happens then  02:42that means every entry is multiplied by 1 third.  So every entry is on the, in the word divided by  02:483\. So the other rows remain the same and the first  row becomes 1 2 third, 1 third and one third.  02:58And then we have the elementary row operation  of type 3 that is adding multiples of one row  03:04to another. So here is an example so here we  subtract three times R2 from R1. So the important  03:17part in this notation is to remember that the  first row meaning the row which occurs first in  03:23this notation is the one which is being changed.  So this is written as R1 minus 3 R2 that is mean  03:31we have changed the first row by subtracting three  times the entries of this second row to it.  03:39So if you do that what happens the  second and third row remain the same  03:43and the first row is changed to 0 minus  1. Why minus 1? Because we get 2 minus 3.  03:511 why 1 because we get 1 minus 3 times  0 and again 1 because again 1 minus 3  03:56times 0. This I hope this is clear. We  have already seen this in determinants  04:01and we saw that something special happens  for determinants we will recall that later.  04:08So let us see what these elementary  row operations are useful for.  04:13So there is a process by which we  can use elementary row operations and  04:20reduce any matrix to the reduced row echelon  form. And I mean there is a very particular  04:26way of doing this I am going to describe this  algorithm and again once, again we have a on  04:31the left I will describe the action and on  the right I will describe via an example  04:40and we will use the same notation that  we used for elementary row operations.  04:45So the first thing we do is find the  left most non-zero column. So the left  04:49most non-zero column. Is the column 3 1 0 namely  the first column. So the next thing we do is use  04:59elementary row operations to get 1 in the top  position of that column. So how do I do that,  05:07so in this case in the example I have 3 in the  1 1 place. So I can just divide the entire row  05:18by 3 I can divide the first row by 3 or  multiply the first row by one third.  05:22So this is an elementary row operation  of type 2. So I can use elementary row  05:29operation of type 2 provided the 1 1 entry  is non-zero. And get a 1 in that place.  05:36So here we if we do that this is  exactly the example that we saw in the  05:40previous slide. Suppose now instead of this  my first row happens to be 0 meaning the 1  05:461 entry happens to be 0 not the first row but  the 1 1 entry happens to be 0. Then I cannot  05:53multiply by anything to get a 1 over there. So then what I do is I will interchange the first  05:59row with some other row. Where that first entry  in that row is going to be non-zero. And how do  06:06I know that there is an entry like that which  is non-zero. That is because this was the left  06:11most non-zero column. So somewhere there must  be a non-zero entry. So if the 1 1 entry is 0  06:18you can interchange and a non-zero entry over  there. So in now example we do not need to do that  06:24but otherwise you can get a non-zero entry. And then you can multiply to make it 1.  06:30So use elementary row operations to get  1 in the top position of that column.  06:36So then once we get 1 in that column in that  position use elementary row operations and  06:47of type 3. So you can use that 1 and  subtract out some the correct multiples  06:56and get zeros in the entries which are below  that 1. So in this case we can subtract  07:09so there is a typo here, this  should have been 1 over here.  07:15In fact, this entire row is not  correct. This should have been the row  07:201 2 third 1 third and 1 third. So now in this 1  2 third 1 third and 1 third, we can do R2 minus  07:31R1. So what does that mean in from the second row  we subtract out the first row. So the first row  07:38remains same third row remains same the second row  changes and doing this the second row this entry 0  07:45over here. This entry 1 over here becomes 0 can  then the other entries change correspondingly.  07:51So we can use type 3 elementary row operations  to make all the entries below that 1 as 0. So  07:58in this example the next entry is already  0. So we do not have to do anything.  08:05So what is the next thing we do?  If there are non-zero entries below  08:15so that is mean all entries are 0 then we are  done. Because the matrix is already in row echelon  08:21form. So what is our aim that the matrix should  somehow come to row echelon form and then from row  08:28echelon form we will move to reduced echelon. So  we want to put it in row echelon form, so if there  08:33are no non-zero rows then what that we mean is we  have a row of which has which start with 1 and an  08:40everything below is 0 so we are done. If there is indeed a non-zero row below  08:47then it may happen that there are some 0 rows and  then there is non-zero. So then we can interchange  08:52rows and bring that non-zero row to just below  the row that we have just finish dealing with.  09:03So once we do that what do we do? Now we  look at the matrix meaning the submatrix  09:11which consist of all the entries the other  than the row that we just dealt with.  09:15So repeat the above steps for the submatrix  below the current row. So what is that submatrix?  09:22That submatrix is in red here. So it is the  submatrix consisting of the next two rows.  09:27So 0 1 third minus 1 third minus 1 third and 0 7 1  1. And what do we do now, we will repeat whatever  09:34process we did for the previous part  we will do it all over again. So let us  09:42recall whatever process was, so process was  to locate the left most non-zero column.  09:53May be I should say the first non-zero  column so here is a first non-zero column.  09:58So once you locate this you change it, so that the  10:02entry there is 1. So I want to  make 1 third into a 1. So the first  10:13row remains the same and what do I do I multiply  10:16the second row by 3. So I get 0 1 minus 1 and  minus 1 and I do not do anything to the third row.  10:27So this is a elementary  row operation of type 2.  10:32And then what do I do next? I look at this 1  over here. So this is going to play the role  10:39of my leading coefficient and then below this  1 I want a 0. So I subtract 7 times R2 from R3.  10:50So R3 minus 7 times R2. So what do I get? So  again nothing happens to the first two rows  11:05and then for the third row I get 0 in this  place which is what I was looking for. And  11:11then in the other two I have to compute. So this is 1 minus 7 times minus 1, so that  11:16is 1 plus 7 that give me an 8 and then this is  again 1 minus 7 times minus 1 which is again an 8.  11:27So now what do I have to do? Well I am done  dealing with this column. So I have got a 0 below  11:35so now I have to look for the next,  I have to look at the rows below  11:41and ask is there a non-zero row,  yes indeed there is a non-zero row.  11:45Then I have to move that row to just below  this row that I have just dealt with.  11:50So here there is no intermediate zero rows, so  it is already there so I do not have to do any  11:55elementary row operations of type 1 to switch  rows. So then within this I look for the first  12:06within this submatrix so what submatrix  do I have now. So I have this submatrix,  12:15so within this submatrix I look for the first  non-zero column. That is the third column.  12:22And then within that column I try get  a 1 in the first possible place.  12:28So in this case I have to multiply by 1 8 or that  is divide by 8. So I do R3 by 8 and what do I get?  12:37I get 1 2 third 1 third 1 third  no change in the first row.  12:430 1 minus 1 minus 1 no change in the second  row. And then the third row I have 0 0 1  12:521\. So using elementary row operations I have  changed my matrix into a matrix which is in  12:59row echelon form. This matrix is in row  echelon form, why is it in row echelon form?  13:04Because if you look at each row then the  leading entry the first non-zero entry is 1  13:09sure that is the case 1 1 1. Then if you look at the leading entry,  13:18so we look at the corresponding  column, so the column is for the third  13:25row let say it is in this column. Then if I  look at the previous row it is on the left,  13:35so that is fine. So we are going in a descending  this way. We are going descending this way that is  13:41what we want when we have row echelon form. So and  if there are 0 rows they have to be the non-zero  13:48rows. So here there is no 0 row, so we are good.  So this is indeed in row echelon form.  13:56So now how do we reduce this further to reduced  row echelon form? So here is the matrix we will  14:04assume that we have our matrix is already in  row echelon form and then we will describe how  14:08to reduce it to reduced row echelon form so  here is the example that we were just doing.  14:14So 1 2 third 1 third 1 third. 0 1 minus 1 minus  1 0 0 1 1. So what is action we have to take,  14:21take the columns containing 1 in  the leading position of some row.  14:24So they are the highlighted columns the first  column the second column and the third column.  14:29And then using the ones the leading terms,  the leading ones use elementary row operations  14:36of type 3 to make everything above that 1 into  0. So we have done it for below. So now we can  14:45do it for above, so here there is small trick  you can really do it for in any for any column.  14:52But we have to choose which column to go with  first and then which column to go with next.  14:56So it is always best to start from the extreme  right. So you start with the third column. So for  15:02the third column what do we do? We use this 1 over  here this 1 over here, I should rather say you use  15:13this 1 over here and make the entries above that  1 into 0. How do I do that? So I do R2 plus R3  15:25so there is typo here this  should have been R2 plus R3.  15:35And I do R1 minus 1 third R3 and I will get zeros  correspondingly so this is a matrix I get.  15:45And now I can move 1 column I can move towards  the left so if I do that let us complete this.  15:55So now I want to get a 1 I want to use this 1  over here to make the 2 third above it and into 0  16:04so how do I do that? I do R1 minus 2 third  R2 and the point is since I have already  16:15taken care of the entries to the right it  will not change what happens on the right.  16:20So it will only effect this column or it may  affect, yeah it may only affect this column.  16:28So it would not change anything any  other column. So you do not have to  16:34worry about the other columns. So  then in that case I get 1 0 0 0.  16:43Yeah I should have been careful there. No I should  not say it would not affect any other column  16:48what I should was it does not affect any  other column which has leading coefficients  16:56which is what we really care about. So 0 1 0 0  and then 0 0 1 1. And now this matrix is indeed  17:07in reduced row echelon form. So it was a leading row echelon form,  17:12so the leading entries here every row is 1  then for the ones if you look at the columns  17:18all the entries are 0. And of course there  is no non-zero rows at all. So this is in  17:23reduced row echelon form now. So this is how we  change a matrix to first into row echelon form  17:32and further into reduced row echelon form. So let us do this example so for this example  17:42how do I go for doing this, let us do the first  step. So the first step is you look at first  17:50non-zero column. So in this case the first column  is non-zero and then you try to get 1 in the  17:58beginning place the 1 1 entry over here. So here  I have 2 over there so I just divide by 2 and  18:04by dividing by 2 I get 1 2 and half in the  first row and the other rows remain same.  18:12Let us do one more step. So now using the 1  18:16in this place this 1 1 place if we can sweep out  meaning we can make the 3 and 5 into 0 how do  18:26I do that? I do R2 minus 3R1 and R3 minus 5R1.  Then what do I get? So let me write this down,  18:34so what I get is well the first row remains the  same so 1 2 half. And then this entry become 0,  18:41so this is R2 minus 3R1 that is 8 minus  6 that is 2 and then 7 minus 3 halves,  18:51so that is 14 by 2 minus 3  by 2 so that is 11 by 2.  18:58And then for the third row I have R3 minus 5R1. So  this is 0 and then 6 minus 10 which is minus 4 and  19:08then 9 minus 5 by 2 so that is 18 by 2 minus 5 by  2 so 18 minus 5 is 13 by 2. So this is what I get  19:23after doing this step. So I have finished dealing  with my first column. So now I look for my  19:34submatrix. So here is I my submatrix over here  19:40and then we repeat this procedure,  so if you repeat this procedure,  19:44what do we get? What we get is look at the first  non-zero column so for the first non-zero column  19:55which one is that, that is the  column the 2 minus 4 column.  19:59So what do I do I try to get a 1 in the first  place, how do I do that? I do that by doing  20:06R2 by 2. So if I do R2 by 2 I get 0 1 and 11  by 4 and then the third row remains the same.  20:22And then what should I do? I should use this  1 and try to get a 0 below it. So I should  20:29use the 1 and get a 0 below so I should make that  minus 4 into 0 so how do I do that? I do R3 plus  20:374 times R2. So if I do R3 plus 4 times R2. What do I get? So R3 plus 4 times R2 will be  20:44so the row will remain same the second row  remain the same and the third row becomes 0 0  20:53and now 13 by 2 plus 4 times 11 by 4 so is 13  by 2 plus 11 so what is that 13 plus 22 by 2  21:03so that is a 35 by 2. And then the last thing so  now this second column is done, so now I should  21:14move to the third to the submatrix, what is the  submatrix? Well it is just this last row.  21:22And I want to get 1 in the place of that  35 by 2 so what do I do I just multiply by  21:262 by 35 and that is the final step in this  procedure. Sorry, so to do that I do 2 by 35  21:37R3 and I get 1 2 half 0 1  11 by 4 and then 0 0 1. So  21:53this is the row echelon form. So if I want  to move from here to reduced row echelon form  21:59I should make the entries above the 1s  into 0. So there is a as I said you move  22:07from the right towards the left. So you take the last column, so you take  22:11the third column here. So I should do R1 minus  half R3 and R2 minus 11 by 4 R3. So if I do that  22:33what do I do? What do I get? So I will get 1 2 0  and then 0 1 0 and then 0 0 1. So I should maybe  22:53so that is what we get. And then the final step  is to get a 0 in the place of this 2 above which  23:01is above that 1 so to do that I should do R1  minus 2 times R2 which gives me 1 0 0, 0 1 0, 0  23:120 1. This is familiar matrix as we  know this is the identity matrix and  23:21very shortly we will see how we got the identity  matrix. So why we got the identity matrix  23:28fine. So I hope the procedure is clear. So this  is the second example that we have seen.  23:33So now let us move to the determinants part.  So let us in that same example that we had  23:37previously let us recall the determinant. So let  us may be quickly look at that example again.  23:45So this example was 2 4 1, 3 8 7, 5 6 9.  Let me write that down 2 4 1, 3 8 7, 5 6 9.  24:01And you can check in we have actually done  this example in the determinants video.  24:05And you can check that if you use the definition  of the determinant then you get a 70.  24:11We did this example so I am not going over  this in detail again but you can check the  24:17computation if you feel you want to recall  what the determinant was. So keep this in mind,  24:25so now let us recall also from the determinants  lecture that we studied what was the effect of  24:31elementary row operations on determinants.  So if you perform a elementary row operation  24:37of type 1. So if I interchange two rows  and the, from matrix A I get matrix B  24:43then the effect on the determinant is that  determinant of A is minus determinant of B.  24:50And then if I divide matrix particular row of  the matrix A by c then determinant of A is c  25:01times determinant of B. So if you divide by c  determinant of A is c times determinant of B.  25:10And then the type 3 elementary row operation was  where we added a multiple of one row to another.  25:16And in that case the determinant remained  unchanged, these are the properties we stated  25:21in the determinant s lecture. So let  us see how we can use this method of  25:27row reduction to calculate the determinant. So for a square matrix A  25:35row reducing into row echelon form produces  an upper triangular matrix, so if you  25:41remember the definition of the row echelon form.  Remember the 1s are going like this, so that means  25:49if you have square matrix that the 1s must be  either on the diagonal or above the diagonal.  25:56And everything below the 1s is 0 that means  this matrix is in upper triangular matrix.  26:05So and on the diagonal you have either 1s or 0s,  either you have of the 1s or you have few 0s fine.  26:15So what is I mean why are we saying this? So the  point of this statement is that remember that for  26:22an upper triangular matrix the determinant  is given by the product of the diagonal  26:29entries. So this was again something we saw in  the determinants video and now we will use this  26:34great effect by this row reduction technique. So now let us determine how to find determinants  26:43via row reduction. So you have a square matrix  is A row reduce it into row echelon form,  26:49if the diagonal entries of the reduce matrix  is continuous 0, then its determinant is 0,  26:54determinant of A is 0. So you do not have  to compute, do any computations at all, it  26:58is already 0 and how do I get this? Well you can  trace back along the elementary row operations.  27:04We know how the determinant changes and it  either remains the same or it gets multiplied  27:09by some constant or it picks up a minus  sign. So if you have final determinant is 0  27:14then your beginning determinant is also going to  be 0 that is why it must be 0 and if the other  27:21option is that the diagonal entries are all 1. And  if they are all 1 then we know that determinant  27:27and then we can trace back through the operations  that we have done and find the determinant.  27:34So let us see an example. Here is the example  that we did earlier in the video. So here was our  27:46matrix A 2 4 1, 3 8 7, 5 6 9. And remember that  we said that this determinant is 70. So we know  27:55that determinant of A is actually 70. This was  explicitly computed from the determinant video.  28:02Now let us use this procedure and see from here  how do we get the determinant of A. So let us  28:10compute the let us start from here. So the determinant over here is 1.  28:14Why? Product of diagonal entry, it is an upper  triangular matrix. So notice that I do not have  28:18to go all the way till reduced row echelon  form I can stop it the row echelon form.  28:25So how do I move to this, so I have divided this  by 35 by 2. So this determinant is 35 by 2 we  28:35can also get this by multiplying by the diagonal  entries because it is again upper triangular.  28:42So what is this determinant well how did we  go from here to here? We went by an elementary  28:48operation of type 3. So it does not change  your determinant, so this is still 35 by 2.  28:56How did we go from here to here? Well we divide  it by 2. So this is going to be 2 times 35 by 2  29:02which is 35, so that determinant of this matrix  is 35, you can check this by explicitly computing.  29:09How did we go from here to here  elementary operations of type 3?  29:13They do not change your determinant so this is  still 35 and how did you go from here to here,  29:17we divide it by 2. So the determinant here must be  35 multiplied by 2 and that is indeed 70. That is  29:26what we describe on the previous slide and this  is an example of the same. So today we have seen  29:31in this video we have seen that we can thus  this wonderful procedure called row reduction  29:38that you can use to reduce any matrix into the  reduced row echelon form. First to row echelon  29:45form and then into reduced row echelon form. It is an algorithm we explicitly described it  29:51now in the previous video we have seen that if  a matrix is in reduced row echelon form we can  29:56easily get solutions for A x equals to B. When A  is in reduced row echelon form. Now we are going  30:03to put these two together in the next video  and describe a method very powerful method  30:11to obtain the solutions of any general  system of linear equations A X equals B.  30:18And in today video the other thing we  did was we saw that this procedure of  30:23reducing a matrix to its reduced row  echelon form or its row echelon form  30:31for a square matrix we can easily  compute the determinant. In fact, if you  30:39go ahead and sort of try to work out what is more  efficient, whether you can compute the determinant  30:47by our definition or by this procedure you  will find this procedure is much, much easier.  30:54And this is very useful because if  you are matrices are very large,  30:57then computing the determinant using the  definition takes much, much more time,  31:03whereas this procedure gives you a far  more efficient way of doing it. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.