---
title: "L9.5: Continuity for multivariable functions :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L9.5: Continuity for multivariable functions :: IITM Online Degree

L9.5: Continuity for multivariable functions

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online BSc programme on data science00:18and programming. In this video we are going to talk about continuity for multivariable00:22functions.00:23Let us recall that in the previous video, we have studied the notion of limits for sequences00:31and limits for scalar valued multivariable functions. So, these were sequences in higher00:38dimensions. So, let an tilde be a sequence in RP denote the coordinates of an tilde as00:44an1, an2 up to anp. We say an tilde is limit a tilde is a1, a2 ap if the sequence in the00:51ith coordinate has limit ai.00:53So, which means that if you take the sequences given by each coordinate that converges to00:59some number ai, and you put those numbers into this vector, and then we say an tilde01:05has that element. So, ani in particular has to converge to ai for each i. So, if each01:12of those coordinate limits exists, then the sequence an tilde as a limit, if even one01:19of those fails to exist, it does not have a limit, so limit will not exist.01:26So, we use this idea to define limits for functions at a point. So, let f be a scalar01:33valued multivariable function defined on a domain D in our case is that you have a sequence01:40converging to a tilde. So, that sequence must belong to D. So, if there exists a real number01:47L such that f of an tilde tends to L for all sequences an tilde and this is the important01:53part for all sequences an tilde such that an tilde tense to a tilde, then we say that01:58the limit of f at a tilde exists n equals L.02:04And we have seen examples of these things. So, we denote this by limit X tilde tends02:10to a tilde f of x tilde is L. So, in the previous video, we also studied some properties, and02:16using them how we can find these limits. So, for example, for polynomials for rational02:22functions and so on. We also saw an example where substitution directly does not work.02:27And so, we have to be careful when we find these limits.02:31Let us first define what is the limit of a vector valued function at a point. So, we02:37have seen for a scalar valued function what happens, so vector valued function is a vector02:42of functions. And so, what we basically will do is demand that for each of them, we study02:49what happens.02:50So, let f D to Rm be a vector valued multivariable function defined on a domain D in Rk, a tilde02:56will be a point such that there exists a sequence in D which converges to a tilde if fi is the03:03ith component function of the function f, and in a minute, we will see examples of what03:09I mean. Then fi is a scalar valued function from D to R. And then suppose for each i the03:15limit X tilde tends to a tilde fi of X tilde exists and equals Li. Then we define L tilde03:21to be L1, L2, Lm then limit X tilde tends a tilde f of X tildes is L tilde.03:28So, this is not the definition, but this is what I would call a working definition. And03:32it is equivalent to the original definition, which we would not talk about. So, this is03:36equivalent to as X tilde comes closer and closer to a tilde f of X tilde comes closer03:41and closer to this vector L tilde. Remember now, that f is a vector valued function, so,03:48it will take vectors as values. And so it has to come closer and closer to some vector03:52L tilde.03:54And if for some i, the limit a tilde for fi does not exist, then the limit of f at a tilde04:03will does not exist. So, we have seen this idea already for sequences. For sequences,04:08what did we do, we took each coordinate sequence, and then check for the limit for that. The04:15same thing is happening here for functions. If you have vector valued functions, you take04:20each component and check for the limit.04:22So, let us do a couple of examples. So, here is limit X tildes tends to 1 comma 2, x squared04:29y plus y cubed comma e to the power xy comma x squared minus 1 by y cubed minus 2. So,04:36recall from a previous video that if we had polynomials, we can just substitute. So, the04:44first so this first one exists, so I will write the what is equal to in a minute. So,04:51to check this limit, what do I have to do I have to take each coordinate function, what04:54are the coordinate functions, this is the first coordinate function f1, this is the04:58second coordinate function f2, this is the third coordinate function f3.05:02And then I have asked, let us look at these three functions, what happens for each of05:15these limits? Each of these exists, then you just put that vector together. And that is05:33what this limit is. Even one of them does not exist, this one will not exist. So, for05:38the first one, we have a polynomial. So, we can just substitute, that is what you saw05:42on the in the previous video. So, this is 1 squared times 2 plus 2 cubed, that is 10.05:51For the second one, we saw that e to the 4x y also you can substitute by using that xy05:57is a polynomial and then using the fact that you are composing with the exponential function.06:02So, this follows from the composition property. So, this is e to the power 1 times 2, so this06:07is E squared. And for the third one, you use the quotient. So, let us check that the quotient06:13is. Well, the main problem comes from the denominator. So, the denominator here, the06:18limit is 2 cube minus 2, which is non-zero. So, no problem we can just substitute. This06:24is one squared minus 1 by 2 cubed minus 2, this is 0.06:29So, each of these limits exists. And now you just take these components and put them in06:36their proper place. So, this is the limit. So, I hope it is clear what now the previous06:41slide said, you take each component function check for its limit, once it exists, the function06:48for this and the limit for this entire function exists.06:51Let us look at the second one. So, this is the first component function. This is the06:57second component function. So, for the first component function, you have sin xy divided07:05by xy limit xy tend to 00. So, I want to check what happens to this limit. Well, as we noted07:16in the previous video, if you have things which are not like polynomial rational functions,07:24the way to do them is to try and use the composition law.07:29So here, this is a composition of two functions. The first function is xy. The second function07:36is sin of u. So, as xy tends to 00, this to 0, and as u tends to 0, my bad, this is not07:45sin of u, this is sin of u by u. And as u tends to 0 sin of u by u tends to 1, so this07:55limit is going to be 1, let us see what happens to the second coordinate. So, is x cube minus08:04y squared x divided by x squared plus y squared squared.08:09But in the previous video, we have seen at the end that this limit actually does not08:14exist. So, I suggest you recall this. And so, one of these coordinate functions does08:24not have a limit that means this also does not exist. So, I hope it is very clear what08:32it means for vector valued functions to have limits, basically it boils down to asking08:37for scalar valued functions, what is what the limits are, which are each component fine.08:41So, what is the limit of a function at a point along a curve? So, now we have seen examples08:47of or rules about how to compute the limits of functions at a point that is for scalar08:58valued functions that are at a point if you can write them in terms of other functions09:06that you already know have limits. So, addition, subtraction, products composition quotients09:15if the denominator is nice, so these are these are ways we know of how to prove that a limit09:21actually does exist. How do we know that the limit does not exist?09:28So, we have seen the idea of how to do this in the previous video at the end, when we09:35looked at an example that we just saw in the previous slide. And now we are going to refine09:42that idea. And to do that we are going to talk about the limit of a function at a point09:48along a curve. And this will really generalise what happens in one variable calculus.09:53So, let f be a scalar valued multivariable function defined on a domain D in Rk and a09:58tilde will be a point such that there exists a sequence in D which converges to a tilde.10:02This is our standard hypothesis. Because without this, we do not know how to make sense of10:07limits at that point a tilde. Let C be a curve passing through the point a tilde belonging10:13to the domain D.10:14So, recall that we have studied curves in one variable calculus, so a curve is nothing10:19but something like a wavy line may be something, it could be a circle, straight lines are special10:26cases of curves, but curves can have curvature, they can be curve. So, we want to look at10:33curves, which are passing through that point a tilde and which also belong to the domain10:37D. Except for that point a tilde, a tilde could belong may not belong.10:43The limit of f at a tilde the curve C, I will repeat that along the curve C exists and equals10:51L if for every sequence an tilde contained in C, which converges to a tilde, the sequence10:58af f of an tilde converges to L. So, now what we are doing is, we are saying well, I want11:04to only check for what happens along this curve. I do not for now, I do not care about11:09the function may be defined on the entire, let us say R2, but I only want to see what11:14happens to this function on this particular curve.11:17We have seen this kind of idea, before, when we talked about directional derivatives or11:22partial derivatives, we restricted our attention to a particular line, and then said what happens11:28to the function along that line. Of course, there we talked about rate of change, here,11:33we just want to talk about the function itself, not we are not yet going to rate of change.11:38So, what happens to the function when we restrict it to a curve? So, on that, as you come closer11:46to the point a tilde, do the function values come close somewhere.11:51And if they do, and that is the number L, then we say that the limit of f at a tilde11:59along the curve C exists and is L. So, let us again look at that same example from two12:07slides ago. So, let us look at g of xy is x cubed minus y squared x divided by x squared12:13plus y squared squared. So, limit xy tends to 0, 0 along the x axis, let say. So, along12:27the x axis, the y is 0. So, this reduces to a function of one variable. So, along the12:37xy, to solve this, I will say so. So, I will solve this in a minute.12:42So, along the x axis, the y coordinate is 0. And the hence the function is g of x comma13:050\. So, it is a function of one variable. And that is really the point of defining this13:10notion of long ago. So, g of x comma 0, which is x cubed, divided by x to the power 4, which13:19is 1 by x. And now we know what happens. So, this limit is exactly limit x tends to 0 113:26by x, and this does not exist.13:29So, along the curve, y is equal to 0, which is the x axis, this limit does not exist,13:37we could ask the same question about what happens along the y axis. So, limit x y tends13:43to 0, 0 g xy along y the y axis, and you can see that if you look at g of 0 comma y, then14:00then the numerator is 0, the denominator is y to the power 4, so this is 0. And so, this14:06is limit as y tends to 0 of the function 0, so this is 0.14:12So, for g along the curve, which is the x axis, the limit does not exist along the y14:21axis, it is 0, we could do some other curve, you can choose your favourite curve, let us14:26say I choose the curve y is equal to x. So, what happens along that line, so limit x y14:32tends to 0, 0 along y is equal to x.14:37So, in this case, we are asking for a limit as x tends to 0, where you put y is equal14:52to x in the in this expression, so you get x cubed minus x cube are divided by 2x square15:05to the power 2. So, this is again 0. So, this is like limit of x tends to 0 of the function15:120 is again 0. So, I hope this this is a, it is clear what we what we mean by the limit15:22along a curve with this example in mind. So, here are the 3 curves for which we computed15:32the limit. So, along two of them it is 0 and along one of them it does not exist fine.15:40So, let f be a So, now what is the connection, this is a real point and this is the most15:47important slide in this video, what is the connection between the limits of a function15:52along curves and the limit of a function? So, the limit of a function we saw was you15:57take any sequence tending to that point A tilde and look at F of A and tilde does it16:02convert somewhere.16:03So, whereas for a curve we are saying you take only sequences on that curve. So, now16:11again let f be a scalar valued multivariable function or usual hypothesis. So, the limit16:16of f at a tilde will exists and equals L precisely when which means, if this happens then whatever16:23is next happens and if that happens then this limit exists and equals L, precisely when16:30for every curves C in the domain D passing through a tilde the limit of f at a tilde16:37along C exists and equals L.16:38So, what are we saying? We are saying that if the limit at a point is L, then whatever16:47curve you choose the limit along that curve for that function will also be L the other16:54side if you if for every curve C, as you come close to this point a tilde along that curve17:03the function value comes close to L, the limit is L and this happens for every curve is the17:09same, then the limit of f itself not along the curve, but globally is L.17:17So, this is a very important statement. And the spirit of this statement is for one variable17:25calculus, we did the same thing when we defined limits. In fact, that was the definition we17:29said you come along the curve from the right you come from the left and if they match that17:38was left limit and right limit, then then that is, then whatever value that is that17:45is the limit. So, here we are we have many directions. We have many directions, in fact17:51more than directions, we have many curves.17:53So, you look at all possible curves, via which you can come to that point. So, you trace17:58some curve come to this point ask does the function value tend somewhere. You trace some18:03other curve come to that point asking does the function value 10 to that same something,18:09if for any one of those it does not exist, that is it, you that means the global function18:14value, that limit is not defined. If for all of them, it is some number, it is the same18:20number, then the global limit value is that same number.18:26So, important point is, this is often used to show that a limit at a point does not exist.18:31So, we have seen an example already when we did that example, x cubed minus x squared18:35y divided by x square plus y square whole square.18:39Let us do some more examples. So, this is limit of the function x squared minus y squared18:46by x squared plus y squared xy tends to 0, 0. As you can see, these are all rational18:51functions, wherein you cannot substitute. If you can substitute and get away, go ahead18:57and do that. That is the best possible scenario. Unfortunately, here, you cannot do that. So,19:01we have to really sit and compute. So, what we will do is we will again find what is the19:09limit along the x axis and the y axis.19:11So, along the x axis, so along the x axis means y is 0, then this becomes limit as x19:22tends to 0 x squared by x squared, which is clearly 1 along the y axis, this becomes limit19:35as y tends to 0. So, here x is 1, x is 0. So, you get minus y squared by y squared,19:45which is minus 1 and already these two values do not match. These values do not match and19:52because these two values do not match, this limit, does not exist.19:57How do I know that? Because had the limit existed, then along every curve, you would20:02have had the same limit. And then that that means in particular along the x axis, you20:07would have had that limit along the y axis also, you would have had that limit, but then20:11these values do not match. So, I hope it is clear how we use the theorem on the previous20:17slide.20:19Let us look at this example, where you have limit xy tends to 0, 0 x y by x squared plus20:24y squared. Let us do along the x axis, what happens. So, along the x axis, when here you20:38have to substitute you have y0, so that means you get 0 by x squared plus 0 squared, which20:46is 0, the symmetric, so as you can see about the y axis also the same thing will happen.20:54So, limit as y tends to 0, 0 by 0 squared plus y squared. This is 0.21:02So, unlike our previous case, where we had, we took the two curves, x axis and y axis,21:09and they already gave different limits. Here, for the axis they are matching. So, there21:14is still a chance that this limit exists. So, let us look along the line, y is equal21:24to x. So, along the line y is equal to x, this is you substitute y is equal to x and21:30then take limit x tends to 0. So, this is x squared y, x squared plus x squared, that21:38is half. And these do not match. So, this does not match with either of these two. So,21:44this limit does not exist.21:46So, I hope it is clear what I am doing, I am somehow choosing curves. So, my first possible21:53choices will be lines, so easiest curves or lines. So, I am choosing lines along which21:59these limits do not match. Sometimes what will happen is that for every line, the limit22:06will match. But then you can somehow be smart and choose some other curve.22:11So, if you want to take the general line, you should take, for example, in this example,22:18let us look along the line y is mx. Of course, y is mx covers everything other than the line22:25x is 0, so that we have to make a special case. So, let us see what happens for those,22:31along the line y is equal mx, well you substitute y is equal to mx. So, that means you get x22:37times mx squared divided by x squared plus mx to the power 4.22:46So, this is a mx cube by x squared times 1 plus m squared x squared. And after cancelling,22:58you can see that this limit is 0. So, this limit does exist and is 0, what happens along23:05the line x is 0. So, along the line x is 0, you have to substitute x is 0. So, this limit23:11clearly is 0. So, this is 0 by y to the power 4 is 0. So, you can see that for all the lines,23:19you are getting the same limit. So, this limit really has a very strong chance of existing.23:23And in the tutorial, you will be discussing this in more detail. So, I leave this for23:28now, fine. So, I hope it is clear how to use that previous theorem about the limit of a23:36function along a curve. It is a very important idea. And, and it is very useful in examples23:44like this.23:45So, let us go on to talk about the continuity of a function. So, we have talked about the23:50continuity for one variable functions using limits of functions. And now we are going23:56to do the exactly the same thing for multivariable functions. Let f be a multivariable function24:01defined in our domain D in Rk. And a tilde be a point in D. So, now we want a tilde to24:06be a point in D because we want f to be defined on a tilde such that there exists a sequence24:12in D which converges to a tilde.24:14We still want that condition, f is continuous at a tilde if the limit of f at a tilde exist.24:21And not does it exist, the value of that limit is f of tilde this is what the definition24:29was even when we add a one variable function. So, f is continuous at a tilde is equivalent24:36to saying that, if you take a sequence which is convergent to a tilde, then f of an tilde24:42is convergent to f of a tilde. That is exactly what it means for f to be continuous at a24:47tilde.24:48And note what this means note that continuity means the limit at a tilde can be obtained24:53by evaluating the function at a tilde. So, you can, you can just say that limit is equal24:59to f of a tilde. So, you can evaluate the function in a tilde. So, the function f is25:04said to be continuous. So, this is all talking about the when the function is continuous25:14at a point a tilde. So, now we say that the function f the entire function is continuous25:19if it is continuous at all points of in the domain. So, that means limit x tends x tilde25:26tends to a tilde f of x tilde is a tilde for all points a tilde in the domain. Fine.25:32So, let us end with this example of our good old friend x cubed minus y squared x by x25:40squared plus y squared squared. This is a f x y is not equal to 0, 0 and it 0 if xy25:46is equal to 00. So, I think you already know what is coming, but let us complete this.25:51So, the question is this continuous at 0, 0 or is this a continuous function in general?25:58So, if a tilde is not equal to 0, 0, then limit x y tends to a tilde g of xy. So, if26:23a tilde is not 0, 0 that means at least one of its coordinates is non-zero say a tilde26:31a comma b. And that means, if it is not 0, 0 that means at least one of them is not 0.26:39So, I can write g of x comma y as a quotient. So, let us say I can write it as f of xy by26:49h of xy both of these are polynomials. So, for polynomials to get the limit I just substitute26:56and in this case limit as xy tends to a tilde h of xy. This is a h of a tilde and h of a27:06tilde is not 0. Why is h of a tilde non-zero, because this is going to be equal to a squared27:12plus b squared whole squared and if ab is not 0, 0, then at least one of them is not27:180 that means, this number is non-zero. So, this is not 0.27:23So, I can use my quotient rule and I can just substitute. So, this is just g of a tilde.27:31So, this limit exists. So, if a tilde is not 0, 0 the function is continuous at a tilde.27:38So, the only question is what happens at 0, 0. And we have actually seen what happens,27:45but I just recall for you. So, limit xy tends to 0, 0 g of xy we checked in a slide a few27:59minutes ago that this does not exist. So, it just does not exist. Why, because we came28:06along the x axis and the y axis and along one of the axes, we found that the limit does28:11not exist.28:12So, therefore in particular, it does not equal g of 0, 0, which is 0 which does not exist,28:20so there is no question of (())(28:21) this. So, therefore, the function g of xy is not28:30continuous, or maybe we will see is continuous at all points28:42except 0, 0. So, I hope this example also clarifies the notion of continuity. This is28:51really the same as we have done for one variable calculus, except that you have more variables28:56now. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.