---
title: "L12.5: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z) :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L12.5: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z) :: IITM Online Degree

L12.5: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z)

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online BSc program on Data Science00:18and Programming. This is the final video of this course. So, let us do a review of whatever00:24we have studied in this course, I am going to do a week-by-week review. But I will take00:29bunches of weeks, depending on the topic. So, topics which are sort of clustered together,00:35I will try to address them in one shot.00:38So, this is a very brief review, it is not meant to exhaust the entire course, in the00:45sense of I would not be able to cover all the ideas or all the details of what we have00:49done in the course. But this is a broad outline of what we have learned. And yeah, it is my00:56hope that if not the details, at least the words and the topics that we have learned01:03are something that you can keep in your mind as you go ahead, especially for the upcoming01:09courses of Machine Learning, and other courses also, where they may not use the same ideas01:15that, the exact same ideas that you have learned in this course, but they will use the maturity01:20that you have gained while studying this course.01:23So, let us start with weeks 1 to 3 where we function, where we studied functions of one01:30variable. So, the broad outlines of what we studied were the notions of limit and continuity,01:38differentiability and tangents, and then integration and anti-derivatives, so just as, just to01:43recall within this, what did we do.01:46So, first, we did limits of real numbers, so limits of real numbers. So, that means02:00limits of sequences of real numbers, maybe I should write limits of sequences of real02:08numbers or limits of sequences in R. So, the idea here was that the sequence comes closer02:18and closer to a point as your sequence increases, as n increases.02:24So, we use this idea to talk about limits of a function. So, we said, if you have a02:31limit, if you have a sequence, which approaches some real number x, then the function value02:39at the sequence points must approach the function value at that number x, and if that happens02:47for all sequences, which converge to x, then the function is said to be continuous at that02:54point.02:55So, we made several intermediate steps. So, we had the notions of left limit and right03:02limit, which is when we said, we look at what happens when we come from the left, from the03:10right. Sometimes it happened that both sides there were limits, then we demanded that the03:15limit matches and if they, if it did, left and right matched, then we set the limit as03:22x tends to some point A that exists.03:27So, limit exists at a point. And then finally, we add continuity, which said that the limit03:38must exist, and that limiting value at the point must match the function value. So, the03:45function evaluated at A is the same as the limit of x tends to A f of x. So, in other03:54words, you can interchange limit and function that was the idea of continuity. So, this04:00was a brief outline of what you did for limits and continuity.04:04Then we studied the notions of differentiability and tangents. So, we saw that limits. The04:12notion of continuity allows us to talk about the existence of limits, but it does not guarantee04:19that the function behaves well. So, what do we mean by behaves well? That the graph of04:23the function does not have corners. And somehow, we wanted to avoid corners, because wherever04:29we have corners, it becomes difficult to talk about rate of change.04:33So, the main or underlying theme here was that we want to study the rate of change of04:40a function at a point. So, we saw that this rate of change is captured, provided the function04:47is differentiable at that point. Which meant that as you take limit h tends to 0 f of a05:02plus h minus f of a divided by h, this should converge somewhere and whatever that value05:09is. So, it should exist and whatever that value is we call f prime a. So, that was called,05:14so f prime is a function that is created in this way, so, that is the derivative function.05:20So, f prime is the derivative function of f. And we saw that the derivative function05:36is or the idea of differentiability is very, very, very closely related to the idea of05:45the existence of the tangent line. So, the key point here was tangent so the tangent05:53line at a point a exists. So, this was the same as f prime a exists. And this is the06:08same as the linear approximation, best linear approximation at a exists. This was the idea06:25of tangents and the idea of rate of change, fine.06:30So, then the third topic sort of that we studied here was integration. And so, the integral06:42computes the area under the graph of a curve, sorry the area under the graph of a function06:58so the way we do this is to take what are called Riemann sums, which means you take07:09rectangles, which sort of cover the part that you want to find the area of and then you07:17sum up the area of those rectangles, and then you make those rectangles, you make your,07:23the length or the height of the rectangle is measured by the function value at some07:29point within the interval.07:31So, you have to first take a partition of your interval, then for some one of the sub07:38intervals in that partition, there is a point that you choose whose function value you take07:44that is the height of your rectangle, and then the sub interval length is the width07:51of your rectangle, and then you multiply height by width.07:53So, that gives you an approximation for the part around the, above that particular sub08:02interval, and then you sum these up. And that is what the Riemann sum is. And then as you08:08make your partition smaller and smaller, so limit over partition size tends to 0 of the08:24Riemann sums is the integral, this was how we defined the integral.08:37And then we said, well, you can extend this, sometimes you can do 0 to infinity as well,08:41you can do minus infinity to infinity for depending on how the function is etc. And08:47then we also saw that this is a very difficult way to compute actually. And that is where08:53Newton's theorem comes in very, very, very handy.08:55So, Newton's theorem says that if your function is continuous, then first of all the integral09:04exists. And you can find it by finding the anti-derivative. So, that means you find a09:10function, so that its derivative is the function that you have. And then if you can find such09:16a function, so then suppose that function is g, then integral fx dx from a to b is equal09:22to g of b minus g of a, so you evaluate it at the endpoints of the interval that you09:27have, and then take the difference of the larger one from the smaller one, meaning the09:32larger endpoint from the smaller endpoint.09:35So, integral f prime x, or integral f x dx a to b is equal to g of b minus g of a where09:49g prime is equal f this is in a nutshell what Newton's theorem said and this is what allows09:57us to compute our integrals. And you already saw applications of the integrals in this10:03statistics course, you will see more applications of all these things as you go on ahead, fine.10:09So, this was a brief summary of what we did in weeks 1 to 3, where we studied functions10:15of one variable.10:17Next, we started looking at a system of linear equations. And then we started asking how10:24do we solve such a thing? So, the main thrust here was that given a system of linear equations,10:31you can find a corresponding matrix. So, you change your question about solving a system10:38of linear equations, instead do a question about matrices. And this allowed us to use10:43the theory of matrices in order to solve these equations. So, this was the main, the big10:49idea in these two weeks was you can rewrite your system of linear equations in the form10:55a x is equal to b. And then you can use the matrix a and column vector b, to solve for11:02this.11:03So, in order to solve of course, we had to define the various things about matrices.11:08So, in particular, we had to define determinants. And once we define determinants for a square11:15matrix, we saw that there were two methods to solve an equation of the form a x is equal11:21to b for a square matrix if the determinant is nonzero.11:25So, the determinant being nonzero was the same as the matrix being invertible. This11:30was a key point. And the first method was what was called Kramer's rule, which was where11:38you took your column vector B, and you placed it in appropriate columns, you replace the11:46appropriate columns of have a and then you found the determinant of that, and then you11:54divided that by the determinant of a. And that was the ith, so if you replace the ith12:00column, then this process gave you the value of xi, which was a solution. And in this case,12:07there is a unique solution. So, this completely solves the problem of finding the solutions.12:16The other way was to find a inverse, the inverse matrix. So, to do that, we had to compute12:21what the inverse was. And to do that, there was a formula wherein we define what was called12:27the ad joint. So, to do that, we defined the notions of the minors and so on, then you12:36have to place all these, you have to multiply by a suitable plus or minus 1, and then you12:43have to place them in appropriate places. And then that divide the whole thing by determinant12:48of a, and that gives you your inverse matrix. And so that that is the solution via ad joints.12:55So, these were the two methods we saw for square matrices where the determinant is nonzero.13:01After that, we studied extensively, what was called the reduced epsilon form. And the idea13:07of row reduction for matrices, here the matrices were not square, you could have any kind of13:13matrices.13:14And the really big point in this study was, at the end, we had something called the Gaussian13:23elimination method, which in short, some people called GEM, because it really is a gem. And13:29the Gaussian elimination method allows you to solve equations by taking a matrix a here,13:39putting your column vector here, and then doing row reduction.13:44So, this was the method, so where you row reduce a and carry out those same operations13:51on b. And at the end, you get a matrix in reduced epsilon form. And then we know how13:58to write down those solutions. And then those set of solutions are the same for the original14:02system a x equal to b, this was the main point.14:07And the Gaussian elimination method or row reduction was the really outstanding idea14:15that we studied in these weeks. And this idea was later used as well, which we will come14:20to in a minute. So, just to reiterate, we studied matrices over here and we studied14:28row operations. Specifically, how to row reduce and how to use it via Gauss elimination to14:36get solutions of system of linear equations, fine.14:40So, after this, we had weeks 6 and one video in week 7, which dealt with the basics of14:52linear algebra. So, here we studied for the first time what is an abstract vector space,14:58for a vector space we studied what are subspaces? So, just to recall, a subspace is a subset15:08of the vector space V of a vector space, which is itself a vector space. What does that mean?15:22That means it is closed under the operations of scalar multiplication and addition. So,15:30once that happens, it will become a vector space in its own, because all the other properties15:35are already derived from the fact that it is a subset of this vector space. So, this15:41was one of the things we studied, we studied the notion of linear dependence and independence15:47of vectors. So, this was where you took a bunch of vectors. You said, well, let us see15:55if I can solve this equation.15:57So, if you can solve this equation in a non-trivial way, then it is they are linearly dependent.16:05And if it is the only solution is the trivial solution, meaning all the constants CIR 0,16:15then this is linearly independent. So, this is linearly independent, this is what we mean16:25by linearly independent. And one of the ideas behind linear independence16:31is that linear independence allows you to write any vector in the span of the vectors16:40that you have in a very easy form or in a sort of the most compact form. So, of course,16:48before that, we had to talk about spans. So, span means the collection of those vectors16:54that you can obtain from the vectors that are given to you by taking all possible linear16:59combinations.17:01So, span of a set S is set of linear combinations of vectors in S. And then we saw that if you17:23have a set S such that it is both spanning and linearly independent, then that is called17:31a basis. So, basis means spanning plus linearly independent, and then we had various ways17:39of characterizing this. Namely, it is a maximal linearly independent set or a minimal spanning17:48set, etc and the number of elements, the number of vectors that you need in order to form17:55a basis that is exactly dimension.17:57So, dimension is the cardinality of basis. And this is well defined, because any two18:04basis have the same cardinality. And we used all these ideas that we had studied for matrices18:15in order to make computations for this. So, we saw how to if you have a spanning set,18:22how to throw away vectors in order to get a basis, we saw if you have a linearly independent18:28set, how to take in more vectors in order to make it a basis, and in general, how to18:39see whether a set of vectors forms a basis or not. So, all of these were things that18:43we did using matrices.18:45So, maybe I should say here that so checking for linear independence means so checking18:56involves solving equations, so we are solving this equation, solving equations. Checking19:11something is a basis means, again, we have to solve a bunch of equations or you can,19:18if you, if it is in Rn, then you must have n vectors first of all, if it is more than19:27n, then it cannot be a basis. Because they will not be linearly independent. If it is19:32less than n, then they will not be a basis because they cannot be spanning. So, it must19:37be n.19:38And then we saw that checking n vectors in Rn form a basis is the same as them as columns19:56in a matrix and the determinant should be nonzero, should be nonzero. So, if it is nonzero20:16then we know they form a basis, if it is 0 then they do not form a basis. So, our previous20:23theory of matrices, all the operations that we did on matrices helped us with solving20:30these kinds of problems.20:35Then we did a little bit more of linear algebra, where we connected linear algebra with matrices20:41in the sense that first of all, we studied matrices by themselves. So, we studied the20:46notion of column spaces and row spaces for a matrix, so that is the span of the columns20:54of the matrix or the span of the rows of the matrix, so they will be if the matrix has20:58size m by n, so that means it has m rows. So, each row is an element of Rn. And so,21:09the row space will be a sub space of Rn, and the column space will be a subspace of Rm.21:16And so, then we studied these column and row spaces, and we saw how to get a basis for21:25the column space and the row space again, the underlying idea was Gaussian elimination21:30because you have a spanning set already, so, you can use Gaussian elimination to throw21:35out some vectors, some of these columns or rows, and then you can get a basis for the21:43column space and the row space.21:44So, similarly, we define something called the null space of a matrix. So, the null space21:51means all those vectors x such that a x is equal to 0. So, again this means solving equations,22:00and we know how to do this using Gaussian elimination. So, using Gaussian elimination,22:05we could tackle the problem of the null space. And in fact, the Gaussian elimination method22:11also gave us what are the basis vectors for the null space.22:18And putting these two together, we could find the rank of the matrix which is the dimension22:23of the column space or the row space, which happened to be the same and the nullity of22:28the matrix which is the dimension of the null space. And it also showed us that something22:38called the rank nullity theorem was true, which meant that rank plus nullity is equal22:42to n, where this matrix is of size m by n.22:46So, all of these are the checking part is a byproduct of Gaussian elimination. So, this22:55is a really powerful method as I commented earlier, which is why it is often called GEM.23:05And finally, we studied the notion of equivalence and similarity of matrices. So, this came23:11towards the end of the 8th week after we had also studied linear transformations, which23:16I will do in the next slide. And after which it made me a little bit more sense.23:22So, the idea of equivalence is not so difficult to understand. So, B is equal to Q inverse23:32AP or Q A P, so this is equivalence. Similarity is a much, much deeper idea. So, the idea23:47of equivalence is just to say that when do two matrices have the same rank, once two23:52matrices have the same rank, they are going to be equivalent. So, it is a precise condition.23:59And where do we need this?24:01Well, if you change your basis on both sides, then you change your matrix that is coming24:06to linear transformations. And that is why this is defined in the first place. Similarity,24:11though, is much, much more involved idea, because here what we are doing is we are changing24:18our basis simultaneously on both sides. And that is why we had similarity and the idea24:27of similarity is going to come in again, it will come when you study machine learning24:30and foundations and you will study things like Eigen values and characteristic polynomials24:38and so on. So, although we had only one video on this, this idea is going to come again.24:45So, I would encourage you to pay attention to this, do it once more before your ML course24:52if you want.24:55So, the same set of weeks. We also studied linear transformations. So, linear transformations25:03essentially functions from vector spaces to vector spaces. Well, of course, we know, the25:10idea of functions already. If you have two sets, a function takes something in here and25:15says I will associate to this element of the set, I will associate some element of that25:23set. This is what a function does.25:25But when you have extra structure on those sets, then you will often like to preserve25:30that structure. So, here for vector spaces, what is the main structure that you have?25:35It is coming from addition and scalar multiplication. So, you would like to preserve that structure25:41and linear transformations are exactly what do that.25:43So, linear transformations are defined by the fact that if you have a linear combination,25:50and you apply the linear transformation, then you get a linear combination on the other25:55side, where you can take your transformation inside the linear combination. So, linear26:03transformation means when you apply your function to a linear combination, you can take your26:10function inside the linear combination. This is exactly what is a linear transformation.26:16Now, again, the punch line in this entire set of videos was, once you fix a ordered26:23basis for V and W, you fix an ordered and remember here it has to be an ordered basis,26:28not just a basis, yeah, you fix a set of vectors V1, V2, Vn, and W1, W2, Wm, then you get a26:40matrix. How do I get a matrix, if I express f of one of the basis vectors of W in terms26:50of the basis vectors for V, so I have V to W sorry, so if I take a basis vector for V,27:00and apply the transformation and express that in terms of the basis vectors of W, the ordered27:05basis of W that we have chosen.27:07So, those coefficients are what come into your matrix, that gives you a matrix and essentially,27:12this entire thing said, well, I have this linear transformation, but what I am going27:17to do is I am going to choose ordered bases on both sides convert it to a matrix, then27:21whatever I want to find about that linear transformation, I am going to use my matrix,27:26which we developed a lot of theory for in order to find it. So, what are some of the27:30things that we could find, the image of the linear transformation, this goes to the column27:35space of the matrix, this corresponds to the column space of the matrix.27:38So, in particular, if I want the dimension of the image of the linear transformation,27:45then so sometimes that is called the rank of the linear transformation, then that is27:51exactly the dimension of the column space or the row space of the matrix, and that can27:56be found by finding the rank of the matrix, which we have seen before can be done using28:02Gaussian elimination.28:03Similarly, we define something called the kernel of the linear transformation that is28:07exactly what corresponds to the null space of the matrix. So, again, you find, you can28:12find the nullity or a basis for the null space using Gaussian elimination and then use that28:17to get the basis or the dimension of the kernel of the linear transformation. So, that was28:25again called nullity of the linear transformation.28:27And then because we had this very nice formula for matrices that rank plus nullity is n,28:31you get the same thing for linear transformations, this was broadly what we did. So, the key28:37point here is this thing of how we did this and I think this is a fairly if you are seeing28:48it for the first time this is a fairly involved process, it is not difficult but you have28:53to keep it in mind that what are you doing, so how do you get your matrix, this is what28:58you have to keep in mind.28:59So, express the basis vector of V in terms of the apply your linear transformation and29:07express that in terms of the basis vectors for W and those coefficients are what you29:12should take and that put them in the appropriate places in your matrix. This is exactly how29:17you get this matrix. Yeah. So, a large part of linear algebra as you have seen so far29:25is to convert your problems from abstract vector spaces into a tangible thing that we29:33understand like matrices. This is exactly what linear algebra does for you.29:39And then finally, we had one last video in week 8, which is called, which was on affine29:45spaces and affine transformations in linear algebra. Now, I want to warn you, some of29:51you might have studied mathematics before and you may have come across the term affine29:57space. It is used in different context. So, this is the context in linear algebra, there30:02is a different context in higher if you have done more mathematics, and that is not what30:07we are talking about in this set of videos, fine.30:10So, what are affine spaces, they are very easy, you take now vector subspaces, you have30:16a vector space, then you take vector subspaces, and you translate them. See, remember that30:22vector subspace means it must pass through 0 when you take it as a geometrical object,30:28like a plane or a hyperplane, or something like that, it must pass through the 0 vector.30:34So, if you translate it, it will not pass through the 0 vector. But that still has some30:40nice structure. After all, it is still a plane, or it is still a hyperplane, although it is30:44not passing through 0. So, you would want, you want to study such things. And indeed,30:48later on, we saw why we want to study such things, because we studied the notion of tangent30:53planes, or tangent hyperplane. So, those are affine spaces.30:56So, that is one of the reasons to study affine spaces. So, they are just translates of subspaces,31:02nothing really at all deep happening in this, only a lot of notation, so you have to get31:08used to it. So, as I said, one of the good reasons for studying this course is to develop31:14your mathematical maturity, that is really what, many of these things are for that reason,31:20fine.31:22So, the vector space corresponding to an affine subspace is unique. So, this is a, it is very31:30intuitive, because you have translated it, if you translate it back to 0 parallelly,31:35then you get something unique. So, that is a unique vector of space that you get. And31:41then how, what are affine transformations? Again, this was a lot of notation when we31:47defined this, but what they are really doing is very simple, you translate your, you have31:53two affine subspaces, translate this to pass through the origin, that translation means31:58already you have a function. So, you map some vector your to the vector on this thing. Similarly,32:06you have a affine subspace here, you transfer it to the origin, meaning passing through32:130\. So, now you have two vector subspaces.32:16Here, you can talk about linear transformation. So, you have a linear transformation here.32:20So, what you are doing is you are saying affine transformation means what, you are first asking32:25for this map, then you are asking for this linear transformation, and then you are asking32:29for this translation, natural, once you put these three together, that is exactly what32:34is an affine transformation. So, writing it down in terms of algebra is a little tedious,32:39but the idea is not at all difficult, it is exactly what is happening, translate, taken32:46in your transformation, translate back that is all.32:53Then week nine was very studied a little bit of geometry allied with linear algebra. So,33:01linear algebra, as we saw is mainly about, so the word linear has something to do with33:07it, so it talks about linear combinations and things like that. So, now we also want33:13to do geometry, because after all, much of this is happening in Rn, Rn has many good33:17property. So, if you have two lines, you can talk about the angle between them and so on.33:21So, how do you capture that in terms of linear algebra? And to do that, we talked about norms33:27and inner products. So, norms were the general version of lengths and inner products was33:34the general version of dot products or scalar products. And just to remind you, we saw norms33:43and inner products coming in later, the inner products came for example, when we talked33:48about directional derivative, so the directional derivative was the inner product of the gradient33:52vector with the unit vector in whatever direction you are, you want to find the directional33:59derivative.34:00And the norm came about when we talked about tangents and the best linear approximation34:07because, after all, when we start talking about best linear approximation, in many dimensions,34:11we have to talk about how close it is. And once we say how close that means, we need34:17to know some notion of distance or length. So, that is where norms came in.34:22So, of course, we did not talk about gender norms when we went ahead, we talked only about34:29the dot products and the usual distance metric, but again, you can think about maybe in some34:38world, there may be a different way of computing distance and there, you may want to do all34:45of this but with a different notion of distance.34:48And I need such things do occur, for example, in physics and so on. Anyway, so that is why34:55we studied norms and inner products, so the main emphasis even if you may not have understood,35:03general norms or general inner products is on the dot product and the length that at35:07least you must know very well.35:10So, once we talked about the norms and inner products, we talked about orthogonality of35:14vectors. So, essentially, remember that the dot product picks up the angle between vectors,35:21that is one of the things that the dot product does. And orthogonality is saying, when are35:27two vectors perpendicular to each other, at least for the usual inner product, that is35:33what it means that they are perpendicular to each other.35:37So, sometimes instead of perpendicular, we say orthogonal. That is the standard language35:41when we do linear algebra. So, if you have an orthogonal set of vectors, then it is linearly35:48independent. This was really the punch line of whatever we did. And the point here is35:54that this allows you, this idea of inner products allows you to easily find nice basis, this36:05is one of the main reasons why we study orthogonality. Or why we would like that things are orthogonal,36:14fine.36:15And the way we did this was to use projections. So, projections is like shadows. This is a36:21very easy idea. If you have something like this, you want to project it down, depending36:26on where your light source is, it will cast a shadow. And that is exactly what the projection36:30did. So, the projection we wrote down concretely as a linear transformation, what it was, so36:39it projects a vector from its original vector to some subspace, this is what a projection36:46does.36:47And if you have an orthogonal set of vectors, then you can use these projections in a very36:53nice way. It is a very beautiful, clear cut formula that you can use. In order to make37:02it into an, if you have a general set of vectors, in order to get a basis, so we have a spanning37:10set, you can create a basis out of that, by using the Gram Schmidt process.37:17So, the Gram Schmidt process sequentially created vectors wherein it said well, what37:25I will keep doing is I will take projections and subtract those out. So, whatever extra37:31things remaining, that is not already there in my previous subspace. So, I will take that37:39in. And that will actually be orthogonal to whatever I already have. And that way it created37:43a orthogonal, in fact, an orthonormal basis.37:50And the reason we prefer orthogonality is because it makes computations easier, so you37:54do not have to keep dividing by the length of the vectors in all. So, it is computationally38:00easier process, I should have, yeah, since we have come to computationally easy process38:04I should also mentioned from the previous slide on matrices, that Gram Schmidt sorry,38:11that the Gaussian elimination method was computationally the fastest method amongst the various methods38:17to solve equations, fine. So, this is a overview of what we did in week 9.38:24Yeah, maybe I should also say, in the middle, we had a break of one week, so I am just doing38:30this according to the weeks in which we had videos coming in. So, you have to delete that38:38week when we had a break, otherwise, some weeks will get shifted by one.38:43And then finally, in weeks 10 to 12 we studied vector calculus, this is exactly where the38:48one variable calculus that we studied in the first three weeks, at least the first two38:53topics, and the linear algebra that we studied in the subsequent weeks came together and38:58we could study functions of several variables. So, the main themes here were limits and continuity39:08again, from similar to one variable calculus, then partial and directional derivatives.39:14And then gradients, differentiability and the tangent plane and then critical points39:19and local extrema.39:20So, let us, let me quickly recall, what we did about limits and continuity. So, the notion39:28of a limit in several variables is slightly deeper than the notion of a limit in one variable.39:39Because in one variable essentially, there are only two directions in which you can come39:42in, there is nothing more that can happen.39:44Whereas in many variables, there are many different possible ways you can come, not39:50just along straight lines, but even along curves. And that makes it a little difficult39:57to understand the notion of limits. So first we had limits of sequences in Rn, then using40:11this idea, we defined the limits of functions. Or let me say a limit of a function at a point,40:24limit of a function at a point.40:32So, the idea here was that, you if there is a point you are interested in, you have a40:39scalar valued multivariable function, you allow all possible sequences which come to40:44that point, find how the function values at along that sequence behave, and you hope that40:54it converges to some point, meaning to some number.40:58And then if you obtain the same number, independent of what sequence you choose, which has limit41:06as that point, then we will say the limit of the function at that point exists. And41:11then if that limit happens to be the same as the value of the function at that point,41:15then we say that the function is continuous at that point. So, using this we could talk41:22about continuity of functions.41:23So, again the idea is the same that limit x tilde tends to a tilde f of x tilde is equal41:31to f of you can take that f outside, f limit of x tilde tends to a tilde x tilde which41:39is a tilde. So, that is f of a tilde. So, you can interchange the limit and the function41:44that is exactly what is continuity. And yeah, so, we studied the notion of continuity.41:53So, this was more or less what we did for limits and continuity, and then we studied41:59the notion of partial and directional derivatives. So, this we did in a fair amount of detail.42:03So, the partial derivatives was so what, maybe before describing what they are, I should42:10say, what was the main punch line of partial and directional derivatives.42:14So, the punch line is, I have a function of several variables. So, one way of studying42:20that function is let me see what how the function changes, when I change just one variable,42:27keep all other things constant. And let me see how it changes when I change one variable.42:36So, the underlying theme here is restrict the function42:50to a line in the domain and observe its behavior there. This was the main thrust of much of43:11this.43:12And so, first we restricted to all the axes and then we found the rate of change along43:22that axis. So, rate of change along the parallel to the Xi axis maybe, so rate of change of43:41f parallel to the Xi axis at the point a tilde. So, this was exactly the partial derivative43:49of f at a tilde, this is exactly what it is, I mean, we wrote down the formula for this,43:57meaning expression for this.43:59And instead of the axes, if you take a general line, which need not be the axis, so you have44:04to take some direction, and you take the line in that direction. So, rate of change of f44:14parallel to a line in some direction at a tilde, this is exactly what was the directional44:25derivative. So, in order to compute it you have to choose a unit vector.44:31So, if u is a unit vector in that direction, that direction in the direction of the line.44:44So, then we had this thing called Du of a tilde. And we defined it as a limit h tends44:53to 0, f of a tilde plus h times u minus f of a tilde divided by h. And, of course, there45:04is no guarantee that this limit exists, but if it does, then the directional derivative45:07does exist. And if you take some particular values of u, meaning if you take the standard,45:12which is vectors, if I take Ei, then I get exactly my partial derivative.45:17So, essentially, what we are saying is, in order to study a function of several variables,45:22I will try to study it along one particular variable. So, if I have a plane, and I want45:25to understand what is happening above the plane, what I will try to do is I will cut45:29that plane, meaning I will take particular lines, see how it behaves on those lines,45:33and then the hope is that I can put together all that information and understand the global45:38behavior of that function.45:41Now, the directional derivative started becoming harder to compute as we went ahead. And so,45:49we hope that there is some easy way of doing this and indeed there is provided your partial45:58derivatives are continuous in the neighborhood. So, one of the key hypotheses in this entire46:06business is this thing about the partial derivatives being continuous.46:09So, del f del x, del or maybe I should say all partials, all partial derivatives. So,46:22key hypotheses I will write it here, all partial derivatives are continuous in a neighborhood46:38or in a ball around the point a, this was really what this hypothesis was what drove46:47all the theorems and computationally efficient methods of finding the directional derivative,46:53etc.46:54So, if this happens, then we, first we define the gradient vector and this was easy, so47:00the or the gradient function. So, this is you put together all your partial derivatives47:04into a vector. So, put together all the partials in a vector, so first one, second one, third47:17one, nth one. And then under this hypothesis, with u as a unit vector, we found that you47:29can compute the directional derivative very easily using the gradient vector. And this47:33was very important, first of all note here that we have, as I remarked earlier that we47:39have used dot products. So, dot products that we studied earlier in linear algebra, this47:44was one of the reasons why we did that.47:46And the second thing that we want to observe is that so the dot product we can write in47:51terms of angle and because we, well angle and norm, angle and length, and because we47:57can do that, we know that the minimum value and the maximum value, so this happens in48:08the direction opposite the gradient. And this happened in the direction of the gradient.48:21And this is very, very important as I remarked, even in the video there, this is what you48:25are going to use in order to do gradient descent which you will learn more, in a more streamlined48:33way when you do machine learning basics, fine. And maybe I should also say that the that48:42no change happens when you are orthogonal to the gradient vector. So, the notion of48:49norms and lengths was used over here from, coming from linear algebra, fine. And of course,48:54we use the vectors in general because the gradient is a vector, fine.49:02And then, we studied the notion of the tangent plane, we wrote down its equation using the49:07gradient vector. And most importantly, we saw that, well in my slide I should have written49:15tangent hyperplane. So, we saw that whatever we had seen first, earlier in the one variable49:22situation namely the existence of the tangent plane, this happens exactly when the best49:32linear approximation to f at a exists.49:43So, for both of these cases, we wrote down explicit equations, the equation to the tangent49:50hyperplane was z is equal to f of a tilde plus gradient of f at a tilde dot with x tilde50:00minus a tilde. So again, you can express that in terms of a dot product. But we had not50:07really talked about differentiability here. And then later, we saw that or I remarked,50:13actually, that this is the same as the function, f is differentiable at a, f is differentiable50:20at a.50:22So, differentiability exactly means that the tangent hyperplane exists, which is the same50:28as saying that the best linear approximation exists, fine. So, this is a general summary50:34of gradients differentiability and the tangent hyperplane. And, yeah, I should have, again,50:38I remind you that, for all of this, this was the key hypothesis. So, this hypothesis is50:44what will often be used in when you want to do this.50:49Now, when you do courses outside of mathematics, often the theory involved, this hypothesis51:00may not be checked. But you should know from looking at the function that this will work51:05on that. For example, if it is a polynomial function, immediately you should say, this51:08hypothesis works. So, there is no problem with using any of these things. Or if it involves51:13a sin function, cosine function, you have good functions that you understand, and where51:17you do not have denominators, or you maybe have denominators, but they are not becoming51:220, etc. So, such cases, we can use all of this with impunity, because now this hypothesis51:29is going to hold.51:31So, this you should remember as you go ahead, because in the further courses, remember that51:37they are not going to do mathematics. So, they will not, they may not emphasize this51:40hypothesis, so that you should mentally do if you are, if you have questions about how51:46do I use this formula, etc, fine.51:49And finally, we also studied critical points and local extrema. So, critical points means51:56this is again, something that we did for the one variable situation where we studied. Yeah,52:01so I think maybe I did not mention that when we went there. So, here I should have said52:10it here as well. So, when we did differentiability and tangents, we also did.52:16So, we also did a critical points and local extrema. And how did we find this? We had52:31a critical point means you set your derivative to 0 and those points are called critical52:36points, well, they also include those points where the function is not differentiable,52:40but in our examples, usually it was differentiable. So, those are the kinds of functions you are52:45likely to see when as you go ahead.52:50And then out of those, some are going to be local extrema, meaning local minimum or local52:55maximum, and then we had the second derivative test in order to check for local maximum and53:02we also saw that it could be inconclusive, fine. And there was also the optimization53:09part where we had a closed interval, and there we know that the global minimum or global53:16maximum exists.53:17And we saw that in order to find it, we have to find all the critical points include the53:21neighboring sorry, the points, the endpoints of the interval, or if there is a function53:28which is broken, then you include all those points at which there are breaks in the function.53:35And meaning broken in the sense piecewise defined, so you choose all those points where53:43the end of the pieces, and then add each of those values, points you check the values,53:48and that will give you your maximum or minimum.53:50So, the same thing happened when we did vector calculus. So, critical point here, instead53:55of the derivative, we now have the gradient vector, so set gradient to 0. So, that gives54:03you your critical points. And out of these, some of them are going to be local, some or54:09all are going to be local extrema.54:10So, the set of local extrema is a subset of the critical points. Here also, I should add54:21the caveat that if the gradient exists, then you set it to 0 and find the critical point,54:28there will be some vectors for which or some points for which the gradient does not exist,54:39meaning some partial derivative is not defined. So, those are also critical points. So, in54:43general, you have to take those also. Of course, in our examples, we did not really see examples54:49of that type.54:50So, your local extrema is a subset of the critical points. And so, we had a hessian54:56test in order to find this. So, this was what was the analog of the second derivative test55:03in the one variable calculus case. And so, from the hessian test we could find the nature55:10of the critical ones, of course, the hessian test is not a absolute test, meaning it could55:17be inconclusive. So that is, that is part of how it works. So, if it is inconclusive,55:23we have to find other ways of finding out whether they are local extrema.55:30Yeah, and then finally, we did all of this for closed bounded domains. So, again, as55:40in the one variable case, the global extrema exist. And so, you have to find the critical55:51point, also find the points on the boundary, find critical points there, then maybe you55:58have boundary of boundary, and you have to keep doing that process, collect together56:01all those points, find the function value at all these points. And whichever point it56:07is maximum, that is your global maximum, whichever point is minimum that is your global minimum,56:11this is how you find them.56:14Yeah, so you have to again use the gradient function. So, this is the overall summary56:19of what we have done in these 12 weeks. This is a fairly fast course, it was, it went at56:27quite high speed. So, I am aware of the fact that some of you may have had trouble keeping56:34on. But really, there is you really do need to know, many of these things, or at least56:43be familiar with many of these things, in order to appreciate the courses that are coming56:49next.56:50So, this material is something that you do have to study. And well, in a way, it is my57:01personal opinion is that if you are climbing up a mountain, the steepest part is best when57:08it is at the beginning, then it becomes more gradually incline, and towards the top, it57:16might actually become like a plateau.57:17So, if you have gone trekking, this is often something that happens. And so often in a57:27lecture series or a degree program, the steepest claims are in the beginning, and then slowly,57:35actually starts easing out. So, the moral of what I am trying to say is that, if you57:41found this course difficult, do not worry, keep going, you will understand it. And it57:47will actually I feel like if you understand this, well, right now, it will actually become57:52easier as you go ahead, you will be very well prepared for what is coming next.57:55It is been a challenging time for all of us, especially in this last year, to do a lot58:02of things. And this is one of the more challenging courses that I have given because it was very58:08different from any course that I have taught before. In terms of both what has happened58:15in the past year, as well as the fact that it is an online course, it is the first time,58:21it is happening, at least in IITM or in the Indian setup. And also, it is a lot of material,58:29which we usually teach in separate courses.58:31So, sort of bring it together was a little bit of a challenge. Of course, this course58:37would not have been possible without all the team that has made these contents possible.58:46I am just the face sort of I think many of you have also interacted with the team, especially58:51in the live sessions. And then there is many others, those who edit and so on. So, I want58:58to thank all of them. And thank all of you for your attention. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.