---
title: "L12.3: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z) :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L12.3: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z) :: IITM Online Degree

L12.3: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z)

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online BSc program on data science00:18and programming. This video is about the Hessian matrix and local extrema for f x y z. In the00:25previous video we have seen the Hessian test to classify critical points for the function00:30f x y. In this video, we will see the same or an analogous test for f x y z.00:39So, as you can see that as your number of variables increases, the test sort of becomes00:46a bit harder, which is why we have these separate videos. Now, one can make sense of all this00:53in terms of linear algebra for the Hessian matrix for n variables. And in particular,01:02if we allow ourselves the notions of Eigen values, which you will study later in your01:07machine learning course, and also use these ideas of diagonalization and orthogonal, using01:17orthogonal matrices. So, we did this when we did similarity and equivalence of matrices.01:21Using all those ideas, we can formulate a general test for n variables. But in the interest01:28of time, and functionality, as far as this course is concerned, I am not doing this for01:35general variables, although we have developed some of the linear algebra already required01:40for this, but we need a little bit more. So, I am restricting myself to 3 variables. And01:45this will be you enough probably for most of the problems that you will come across.01:50So, let us recall what is the Hessian test for a function of 2 variables. So, if you01:56have a function defined on a domain D in R2, and a is a critical point such that the first02:02and second order partial derivatives are continuous in an open ball around a, then there is something02:09called the Hessian test, which means that you compute the Hessian matrix of the function02:16f and evaluated at the point a, that gives you a 2 by 2 matrix.02:21You compute its determinant and the value of the 11 term. If that determinant is positive,02:27and the 1 1 term is also positive, then the point is a local minimum. If the determinant02:33is positive, and the one-oneth term, meaning the fxx at a tilde is negative, then it is02:43a local maximum. If the determinant is negative, it is a saddle point. And if the determinant02:49is 0, which is called the degenerate case.02:52So, the previous 3 are called the non-degenerate cases, which means that the determinant is02:56non-zero. But in the degenerate case, which is to say the Hessian determinant is 0, this03:03test is inconclusive. So, that is really the bad case. That is the case we want to avoid,03:07because that means that the test does not tell us anything. So, we saw some examples03:12of this test, we also saw that it told us the answer in some surprising cases.03:20Whereas, in some cases where it was obvious what the answer should be, it turned out to03:24be inconclusive. So, the test has a, it comes with, it is a double-edged test, sometimes03:31it will be it will work in situations where you really do not know what is happening.03:36And sometimes it will not work, even though you absolutely know what is happening. So,03:40we will see something similar for the Hessian test in three variables.03:45I am not going to do as many examples here. Because we already know the phenomenon that03:50are taking place, namely that it can work sometimes in spite of the fact that we have03:55no clue of what is happening. And it may not work at all, despite us knowing what is happening.04:02So, let us see what the test is. So, again, this is a function f is a function defined04:09on a domain D in 3 variables. Suppose a is a critical point and the first and second04:14partial derivatives are a continuous in an open ball around a tilde. I will remind you04:20that now there are 9 second order partial derivatives fxx, fxy, fxz, fyx, fyy, fyz and04:33then fzx, fzy, fzz. Of course, thanks to Clairaut's theorem, we know that we can interchange the04:44order.04:45So, fxy and fx yx are the same, fxz and fzx are the same, and fyz and fzy are the same.04:56So, effectively, there are 6 partial derivatives. So, this is a fairly long computation if we05:01want to compute this, and then the Hessian matrix is where we put these second order05:06partial derivatives into a 3 by 3 matrix, remember, it is a 3 by 3 matrix now, because05:12you have 3 variables and then the test tells us that if the following things happen, then05:21we can classify the critical points.05:23So, if the term fxx is positive, the term fxx times fyy minus f squared xy, which was05:34the determinant that we used in the 2 by 2 case if that at a tilde is positive, and if05:40the determinant of the entire Hessian matrix is positive, then a is a local minimum. If05:46on the other hand, the fxx is negative, the second term fxx fyy minus f squared xy at05:59a tilde is positive and the determinant is negative. So, this is alternating sign, then06:05a tilde is a local maximum.06:07If the determinant is non-zero, and neither of cases 1 or 2 occur, then it is a saddle06:16point. So, that means in these two, the first two cases we have local minimum or local maximum,06:23and in all the other non-degenerate cases, meaning where the determinant is non-zero,06:32it is a saddle point. And if the determinant is 0, which means it is a degenerate situation,06:40then the test is inconclusive. So, this is the no Hessian test in the three variables06:48situation.06:49This is getting slightly complicated as you can see, and which is why we, I am not describing06:55this in the general n by n setup. It actually has an easier description, but for that, we06:59need to know what are Eigen values.07:02So, let us understand these terms better. So, the terms involved in the test are fxx,07:08fxx fyy minus f squared x, y at a tilde and determinant of this matrix at a tilde. So,07:15what are these terms? Let us write down the matrix. So, here is the matrix fxx fxy, fxz,07:28so I am not really caring now about the order whether it is fxy or fyx because of Clairaut's07:36theorem, fyy, fyz and then fxz, fyz and then fzz and let me draw this like this. So, this07:56is our hessian matrix. So, the Hessian matrix and maybe let us do this at a tilde so in08:04that case, I would evaluate all these at a tilde.08:09So, once I evaluate, these are numbers, these are all numbers. And what do these terms correspond.08:19So, fxx at a tilde corresponds to this term there, so it is the one-oneth term or the08:271 by 1 matrix in the top left corner. This second term. So, the second term here, this08:37term so, this term corresponds to the determinant of the 2 by 2 matrix in the top left corner.08:49And the third term which is the determinant of Hf of a tilde corresponds to the determinant08:58of the entire matrix.09:01So, what we are doing is, we are taking the determinants of the top left corner successively09:08larger. So, the 1 by 1, 2 by 2, 3 by 3 and in fact, we can generalize this to n by n,09:13only thing is those signs, we have to be careful of how they work. And what we are saying is09:20that if that top left corner, if the sign is like this, if it is plus plus and plus,09:29so which means that this is the 1 by 1, 2 by 2, 3 by 3. If it is plus plus and plus,09:36that means they are greater than 0, greater than 0 and greater than 0, then this is a09:40local minimum.09:41If it is a minus plus and a minus note, the alternating thing, this is very, very important.09:49This is where students often make mistakes. If it is a minus plus and a minus, it is a09:54local maximum and in all the other cases other cases, where this is not 0, where determinant10:04is not 0, all other non-degenerate cases by which we mean that the determinant is not10:19zero, this is a saddle point. And if it is the de degenerate case, which means determinant10:33is 0. This, we cannot really say this is the really bad, bad part. So, this is what it10:51seems.10:52So, what you have to keep track of is you have to compute 3 successive determinants,10:55the first one is a 1 by 1 determinant. So, that really there is nothing to say. The second11:00one is a 2 by 2 determinant. And the third one is a 3 by 3 determinant. So, in practice,11:04you do it the other way. Because you want to check that the determinant of the entire11:11matrix first is non-zero, if the determinant of the entire matrix is 0, then you stop the11:15test right there.11:16So, what you do is you your testing should start in the opposite direction. So, you do11:22your testing in this direction. First, you test this, then you test this, and then you11:27test this right. So, first, you test the entire matrix, what is the determinant, whether it11:31is positive or negative, or 0. If it is 0, end of story. If it is positive or negative,11:40then you test for the 2 by 2, if the 2 by 2 by chance happens to be negative, stop right11:46there. Because as you can see, here, you want it to be positive, so then it is a saddle11:51point. If it is positive, then you check for the 1 by 1 that is the way to go.11:58So, let us do a couple of examples. So, these are again, sort of our test examples to remember12:05how the rules work. So, the functions are also very familiar here. So, let us first12:11do x square plus y square plus z square. Clearly this is a non-negative function, and the only12:16place it 0 is the point 0,0,0. So, this is, so 0,0,0 is a local minimum. And in particular,12:23in fact, it is a global minimum, and in particular, it is a local minimum.12:28So hopefully, the Hessian test will tell us that so gradient is 2x, 2y 2z. Hessian is,12:37well, you can compute this, now I am doing this rather fast 200, 020 and 002. Let us12:43compute the various things that we have to compute. So, at 0,0, so the critical point12:48is 0,0,0. And so, the Hessian at 0,0,0 is the same thing. And so, we should compute12:59the determinant of all the top left matrices of decreasing sides.13:06So, the determinant of the entire thing is 8, which is positive, actually, you can see13:15all of them are going to be positive, but I just determinant of the second one is that13:210,sorry 20, 02. That is 4, positive. So, which, which matrix are we looking at? It is this13:30matrix here. And then determinant of the first, meaning the entry in the 1-1, one-oneth place,13:37that is this entry here, so that entry is positive. So, fxx at 0,0,0. So therefore,13:53this is a local 0,0,0 is a local minimum. And that is exactly what we had in our case14:021\. So, this is how you can remember case 1.14:07Similarly, if you take minus x squared minus y squared minus z squared by the same argument,14:12it is always a non-positive function, the only place it 0 is the point 0,0,0. It is14:16a global maximum. And so hopefully, the Hessian test picks that out. So, I am going to sort14:24of do this really fast, gradient is minus 2x minus 2y minus 2z, the Hessian matrix now14:32you can write down is minus 2 0 0, 0 minus 2 0, 0 0 minus 2, critical point is clearly14:390000\. So, this is the Hessian also at that critical point.14:49And now let us see what the signs are. So, the determinant is of the entire matrix is15:00minus 2 times minus 2 times minus 2, it is a diagonal matrix, this is negative. So, we15:06have a minus sign, the determinant of the 2 by 2, that minus 2 0, 0 minus 2, that is15:12minus 2 times minus 2, it is 4, it is positive. And then the one-oneth entry is minus 2, which15:24is negative. So, the signs here are, this is the important part, what are the signs,15:29the signs are minus plus, minus, and that tells us this is a15:39local maximum. And indeed, this is what we already know and so this is how you can keep15:45this in mind.15:46Similarly, if you take x squared minus y squared plus z squared, you will get it is a saddle15:49point. So, I will just write down the Hessian and you can do the checking. So, the Hessian15:54is going to be 2 0 0, 0 minus 2 0; 0 0 2. So, the signs you are going to get are determinant16:06of the entire so the critical point is 0,0,0 and the signs you are going to get are so16:12minus 8, 2 by 2 is 2 0; 0 minus 2, which is minus 4 and already you can stop right here,16:28because Hessian is non, the Hessian determinant is non-zero and the signs are not corresponding16:34to either alternating or plus plus plus.16:37So, you can stop right here, but just to finish it at 000 this is for 2 which is positive.16:45So, this is a saddle point. Indeed, we already know this, because of, well, you can check16:53that along certain axis it is a local maximum, along certain axes it is a local minimum.17:03And finally, if you take x to the power 4 plus y to the power 4 plus z to the power17:084 what happens the gradient is 4x cube 4y cube 4z cube, critical point is clearly 0,0,0.17:18By equating this to 0, and the Hessian you can compute from here is 12x squared 0 0,17:290 12 y squared, 0, and 0 0 12 z squared. And what happens at the point, so at the point17:380,0,0, this is the 0 matrix. And as a result, it is the degenerate case, we cannot say anything.17:48So, this is inconclusive, as far as the Hessian test is concerned.17:53On the other hand, we already know that x to the power 4 plus y to the power 4 plus17:58z to the power 4 is always non negative, it is a fourth power, they will always be non-negative.18:04And the only point where it takes the value 0 is the 0,0,0. So, this is in fact a global18:08minimum. So, in particular, a local minimum. So, in spite of the fact that we easily know18:14that this is a global minimum, the test is inconclusive. So, these are the 4 prototype18:20examples you should keep in mind to, in case you forget the tests. So, this will tell you.18:26Let us do a couple of examples of, of computing this. So, here is f x, y z is xy plus yz plus18:36zx. So, gradient f, we have actually computed the gradient and the Hessian, so the gradient18:42here is y plus z, z plus x, x plus y. So, you equate this to 0. So, then we get these18:553 equations y plus z is 0, z plus x is 0, x plus y is 0. So, that tells us that x is19:04minus y, and are also tells us that x is z, that is what we get from equation 1 and 3,19:13but equation 2 tells us that x is minus z.19:15So, the only way this can happen is if x is equal y is equal to z is equal to 0 is equal19:20to 0. So, the only solutions are x is equal y is equal to z is equal to 0. So, the critical19:26point is 000. And what happens to the Hessian matrix? So, what is the Hessian, so if we19:37write down the Hessian, which we have actually done before, we get 0 1 1, 1 0 1 and 1 1 0.19:46So, this is in particular, the Hessian at 000. And what happens? So, let us do our test.19:58So first, what is the determinant of the hessian matrix? So, this is, so if we do our determinants,20:08this is 0 times determinant of the 1 by 1, 1 minor, minus 1 times determinant of 1 1,20:301 0 plus 1 times determinant of 1 0, 1 1. So, if we compute this, this is 1 plus 1,20:45which is 2, so this is positive. So, at least it is non-zero. So, we are in business, this20:51test is going to be conclusive.20:53So, now we take the 2 by 2 left, top left matrix calculated determinant 0 1, 1 0. This21:02is minus 1 negative. And, well as soon as we know it is negative, this does not correspond21:10to case 1 or case 2. So, this means it is a saddle point. So therefore, 0,0,0 is a saddle21:17point. And I will encourage you to check why it is a saddle point. So, find a sequence21:23of points which go to 0,0,0 for which 0,0,0 on that curve, it is it is a minimum value,21:34and find some other curve on which it is a maximum 0,0,0 is a point of maximum. So, I21:43hope it is clear how we are using this test.21:48So, let us do this final example, for x to the power 4 plus y to the power 4 plus z to21:55the power 4 plus xyz. I want to do this example just to show you that sometimes these calculations22:00do become rather difficult, doable, but difficult. So, what is the gradient, so the gradient22:08is 4x cube, plus yz 4y cube plus xz 4z cube plus xy. Let us set this to 0. So, equating22:22to 0 and we have to really work this out, we get, so we have 3 equations. 4x cube plus22:38yz is 4y cube plus xz is 4z cube plus xy is 0.22:45So, now we have to solve these 3 equations. And note that these are not linear equations.22:54So, our linear algebra would not really help us over here. So, we have to solve sort of22:58see this and solve this by brute force. And also using the fact that, they have a very23:06nice form. So here, here is where your comfort with, with equations or algebra in general23:15will kick in.23:16So, case 1 is, there is one solution staring us in the face, namely, where x is equal to23:21y is equal to z is equal to 0. And, it is very important to note that, once one of them23:29is 0, all the others are 0. For example, if x is 0, then you can put that into the equation23:364y cube plus xz is 0 and that will give you that 4y cube is 0 and that will say that y23:40is 0. And you can put it in the into the equation 4z cube plus xy is 0 and that will say that23:46z is 0. So, by symmetry, if one of them is 0, all of them are 0. So that is case 1.23:53The other cases where none of them are 0. So, all are non-zero, all are not non 0. So,24:01none of them are 0. So, in that case, what we can do is we can multiply each of our equations24:11suitably. So, the first equation we can multiply by x, and we can say that 4x to the power24:194 plus xyz is 0, which means 4x to the power 4 is minus xyz but I can do the same thing24:27for the second equation by multiplying it by y and I can say that 4y to the power 424:32plus xyz is 0, which is saying that 4y to the power 4 is minus xyz and by symmetry we24:41will also get that this is 4z to the power 4.24:45So, what that means is 4x to the power 4 is 4y to the power 4 is 4z to the power 4, so24:51x to the power 4 is y to the power 4 is z to the power 4 and they are not all 0. Fine24:59and now if we if we take the fourth root, what that will tell us is that x is plus or25:08minus y. And again, which is plus or minus z. And now we can, so, now we can substitute25:18this in into our equations. So, substitute in 4x cube plus yz is 0.25:28So, if you substitute this, what you are going to get is 4x cube plus x squared is 0. And25:37since x is non-zero, we can cancel x squared on both sides and what we get is x is either25:42you get this or 4x cube minus x squared is 0. And then what we get is x is 1 by 4 or25:50x is minus 1 by 4. And then so again, for y and z also, you get these three. Of course,25:59all possible solutions are may not be correct, because they have to satisfy these equations26:04over here.26:05So, then you have to back check for what values these are satisfied. And if you do that, you26:11will get your critical points as 0,0,0, which was case 1, and then from here, we will get26:191 minus 1 by 4 comma 1 by 4 comma 1 by 4, 1 by 4 comma minus 1 by 4 comma 1 by 4, and26:301 by 4 comma, 1 by 4 comma minus 1 by 4, and finally minus 1 by 4 comma minus 1 by 4 comma,26:40minus 1 by 4. So, these are the 5 critical points that you will get. And now we have26:47to check the nature of these critical points.26:50So, let us see what is the Hessian. So, if you compute the Hessian, what you are going26:59to get is 12x squared z, y, then z 12y squared, x, and then y 12 sorry, y x 12z squared. Fine,27:21so now we have to evaluate this Hessian at all these various points, and check what happens.27:29So, already, you can see that 0,0,0 this is inconclusive. So, we cannot really say anything27:34about 0,0,0. So, 0,0,0 it is inconclusive.27:47And again, I will encourage you to check what happens at 000. My claim is that this should27:52probably be a saddle point. What happens at the other points, and by symmetry, for these28:01three, at least, we should get the same thing and then we have to check minus 1 by 4 minus28:061 by 4, minus 1 by 4. So, let us check minus 1 by 4 comma 1 by 4 comma 1 by 4. So, in this28:14case, the Hessian is, so the Hessian is, let us write that down, 3 by 4, 1 by 4, 1 by 4,28:371 by 4, 3 by 4, minus 1 by 4, and then 1 by 4, minus 1 by 4, 3 by 4.28:45Now, you can use, use our good old determinants, and check what we are getting. So, notice28:53here that there are constants in this, so you can pull out the constant. So, this matrix28:58is 1 by 4 multiplied by the matrix, which is consists of integers, if that makes your29:04computation easier. And remember that when you take determinant, since it is a 3 by 329:09matrix, that constant will be to the power 3.29:12So, if you do that, the determinant of the entire thing is, I maybe, I not do the actual29:30computation and I will just say that this is positive you can see that is the case because29:34on the diagonal the terms are rather large. So, this is positive. And then for the 2 by29:422, again, this is positive. And the 1 by 1 is again positive, positive, so this is a29:53plus plus plus situation that means this is a local. So, this is a all these 3 are local30:03minimum. And finally, we have the last point. And, again, actually the same thing happens.30:14So, in this case, you get 3 by 4, but all the off-diagonal entries are minus 1 by 4,30:233 by 4 in the regular and minus 1 by 4 everywhere else. And if you compute the determinant,30:32again you are going to get plus plus plus, which means this is also a local minima. So,30:44once again, what what you will find here is that for the points, where it kind of not30:52so clear how the function behaves, the Hessian test is telling us something, whereas for31:000,0,0, it is comparatively easier to see what is happening, because the function value there31:05is 0.31:07And you can try to sort of understand from which side do I come and along with curve31:12do I come, in order to get local maxima, local minima, etcetera. So, that behaves like a31:18certain point. So, the conclusion here is that is that again, the Hessian test is kind31:25of the behavior is kind of surprising, sometimes for things that you may understand relatively31:32better, it gives you inconclusive results, but for things that you may not understand31:38relating, you understand relatively less clearly, it gives you results.31:45Now, of course, we have not gone into proofs of the Hessian test. And maybe that is, that31:53is a separate topic in itself. So, we will not go there. There is a, we can extend this,31:59as I said, for the n by n case, but we will not do that in this course. So, the main theme32:06of this video was that we now have a Hessian test analogue to the second derivative test32:12for 3 variables. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.