---
title: "L12.2: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y) :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L12.2: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y) :: IITM Online Degree

L12.2: The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y)

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello and welcome to the match 2 component  of the online Bsc program on Data Science and  00:18Programming. In this video we are going to talk  about the Hessian matrix and local extrema. So,  00:24we have studied the notion of critical points for  f x, y and in previous video we also studied the  00:32Hessian matrix which consisted of  the second order partial derivatives  00:36placed in a square matrix. So, in the context  of f x, y this will be a 2 by 2 matrix.  00:43Let us recall first what was  the second derivative test for  00:46a one variable function. So, suppose you have a  function of one variable defined in the domain D,  00:51a point a in D is a critical point if either the  function f is not differentiable at that point or  00:58f prime is 0. And now if the function is twice  differentiable, we applied something called the  01:05second derivative test, so the second derivative  test told us the nature of the critical points.  01:11So, the test said the following; if a is a  critical point and if the double derivative is  01:16positive, then this point is a local minimum, if  it is a critical point and the double derivative  01:21is negative, then it is a local maximum and if  it is a critical point and the double prime is 0,  01:28then the test is inconclusive, so we do  not know what happens in that case.  01:35Fine, so this was the second derivative test for  functions of one variable. Now, we would like to  01:43have something analogous for higher order  meaning functions, multivariable functions  01:52and indeed the Hessian matrix is what  is going to allow us to do that.  01:56So, let us first recall critical points  for multi-variable functions. So, if we  01:59have a scalar valued multivariable function  defined in our domain D in Rn, then a point  02:04a in D is called a critical point if either the  gradient is 0 or the gradient does not exist. So,  02:12the main point here was that every local extremum,  meaning a local maximum or a local minimum  02:18was a critical point, so every local  extremum is a critical point.  02:22And what we want to do is once we  get the collection of critical points  02:26we want to identify which of these are local  maxima, which of these are local minima  02:31and if possible if which of these are saddle  points. So, we know that not all critical points  02:38are local extrema because there are things called  saddle points and the saddle point is exactly a  02:44critical point such that the gradient exists and  the gradient is 0 but a is not a local extrema.  02:52So, let us now see how we can use the hessian  in order to classify these critical points.  03:00So, again if f x, y is a function defined in the  domain D and a is a critical point such that the  03:06first and second order partial derivatives  are continuous in an open ball around a. So,  03:11this is a very important hypothesis, in  particular this hypothesis allows us to  03:18apply Clairaut s theorem and say that the  mixed partials are going to be equal.  03:26So, then the hessian test can be applied  to check the nature of the critical point a  03:29and what is the test? If the determinant of  the Hessian matrix at that point is positive  03:35and the second order partial with respect to x  03:42at that point is positive, then it is a local  minimum, if the determinant is positive and  03:48the second order partial with respect to x  is negative, then it is a local maximum and  03:53if the determinant is negative, then it is  a saddle point, and if the determinant is 0  04:00then we do not know, the test is inconclusive. So, this is a slightly more involved test as you  04:05can see then the second derivative test for  one variable functions because here you have to  04:09write down the matrix, compute its determinant  and also check for an entry. Let us so, let us  04:20try to understand how to keep these in  mind. Suppose, I forget the Hessian test,  04:24how do I remember what happens? Well, let us look at these functions,  04:29so these functions we already know what the  situation is, so you have x squared plus y  04:33squared, we know how this function looks, it is  like a bowl and 0, 0 is a global minimum, this is  04:41something you just know from the fact that squares  are positive, so 0, 0 is a local minimum, is a  04:48global minimum in fact and so the test hopefully  should tell us that let us see if that happens.  04:58Similarly, minus x squared minus y squared is the  same thing inverted down. So, now 0, 0 is a local  05:04maximum in fact a global maximum but in particular  global, local maximum. Similarly, x square minus y  05:12squared 0, 0 was a saddle point, this was the  prototype of how a saddle point look like.  05:18And then x to the power 4 plus y to the power  4 here the, again 0, 0 is a local in fact a  05:32global minimum, but since it is the fourth power  something strange happens, so we. So, these are  05:37the four prototype examples to keep in mind and  these, so each of these will correspond to one of  05:43the four conditions that we had before. So, first let us compute the gradient. So,  05:47gradient of f here is 2x comma 2y, and  from here we can compute the Hessian,  05:57so the Hessian is 2 0 0 2, very nice Hessian. So,  from here we get that the only critical point is,  06:07so if I set my gradient to 0, then the only  critical point is 0, 0 and the Hessian is  06:16actually independent of the point, so the  Hessian matrix for 0, 0 is in particular  06:232 0 0 2. And now let us apply the test. So, let us compute determinant of this matrix.  06:32So, the determinant of this  matrix is 4, so it is positive,  06:36so good, so we know already that we are  not in the inconclusive case and we know  06:40that we do not have a saddle point because for  saddle point the determinant will be negative.  06:46So, now it will depend on the value of the 1,  1 term. So, here the 1, 1 term which is fxx  06:56is 2, this is positive so therefore,  it is a meaning 0, 0 is a local  07:06minimum and this is exactly what we knew  already by inspection because x square  07:12plus y squared is always a positive  function with its only 0 at 0, 0.  07:17We can do the same thing for minus x squared  minus y squared so here the gradient is minus  07:242x comma minus 2y. If I set it to 0 that  gives me that the only critical point is  07:350, 0 and the Hessian here that means you take  the partial derivatives of you take minus 2x  07:45and take its partial derivatives so that is minus  2 and 0 and then you take minus 2y and take its  07:51partial derivatives which is 0 and minus 2. So, notice what I did here by definition actually  07:56I should have taken partial of this gradient with  respect to x so that is minus partial of minus  08:042x and then partial of minus 2y, but I just took  partials of minus 2x in the first row and partials  08:09of minus 2 in the second and the reason that  worked is because I know it is a symmetric matrix  08:14from Clairaut s theorem. So, again this Hessian is  08:20independent of whatever choice, so in (partic),  meaning of whatever point, so in particular at  08:260, 0 you get the same Hessian and now let us  see what happens so again the determinant is  08:34non-zero, it is 4, so it is greater  than 0. So, what that tells us is  08:39one it is non-zero that means it is not in  the conclusive situation and two that it is  08:45positive which means it is either  a local maximum or a local minimum  08:48and that will be determined by whatever  happens to fxx and fxx means the 1, 1th entry.  08:56So, at 0, 0 this is minus 2 which is negative  so therefore 0, 0 is a local maximum and this  09:04indeed conforms to what we already know  that this is a global maximum in fact.  09:12Let us do x squared minus y squared,  again if you compute the gradient,  09:16this is 2x comma minus 2y, if you set it  to 0 you get that the critical point is  09:25x is 0 and y is 0, so that is 0 comma 0, let  us find the Hessian, so for the Hessian you  09:31differentiate 2x with respect to x and  with respect to y, so with respect to  09:36x it is 2, with respect to y it is 0, you take  minus 2y differentiate with respect to x and y  09:42with respect to x it is 0, with respect  to y it is minus 2, and now you can see  09:46it is a bit different than earlier. Of course, again it is independent of  09:51the point so at 0, 0 also you have the same  Hessian. And now what is the determinant,  09:58so this determinant is 2 times minus 2 minus  0, so that is minus 4 which is negative  10:05and you stop right here because once the  determinant of the Hessian is negative in the  10:092 by 2 situation, then we know that this is a  saddle point and indeed this is something that we  10:18have seen already, so this is a saddle point. And finally let us do the example of x to the  10:22power 4 plus y to the power 4, find the gradient  4x cube comma 4y cube, set it to 0 that means x  10:31cube is 0, y cube is 0, that means x is 0,  y is 0 so the only critical point is 0, 0.  10:37Find the Hessian. So, now the  Hessian actually involves functions,  10:43so it is 12x squared 0 and then 0, 12y squared  but what happens at 0, 0? So, at 0, 0 the Hessian  10:54matrix actually is 0 0 0 0 and in particular that  means that the determinant of the Hessian is 0  11:05and therefore, this we cannot  conclude anything from the test.  11:09Therefore, the test is inconclusive and  this is a warning that even for simple  11:17functions like x to the power 4 plus y to the  power 4 where we actually know that 0, 0 is a  11:25global minimum not just a local minimum it  is actually a global minimum because it is  11:29a bowl which is x square plus y square is more  like this, x to the power 4 plus y to the power  11:344 is more like this, so it goes up  faster, 0, 0 is a global minimum.  11:41But the test is inconclusive. So, these are the 4 prototypes of  11:48corresponding to each of the cases that you can  remember and if you remember these you will know  11:54instead of by hearting the cases from here  you can recall which case tells you what.  12:03Let us do a couple of other examples.  12:06So, this is x squared plus 6xy plus  4y squared plus 2x minus 4y. So,  12:11let us find the gradient here, these are slightly  more involved. So, 2x plus 6y plus 2 comma  12:236y, 6x plus 8y minus 4. So, if you set  the gradient to 0, so equating to 0,  12:42we get the critical point, we have actually done  this before so I will not spend time here on this,  12:48so we get the critical point 2 comma minus 1,  12:52so this is something that we did  in the video on critical points.  12:55So, I will not repeat this computation,  you get a system of 2 linear equations  13:00in x and y and which you can solve, so we used  Gaussian elimination to solve that, fine.  13:09So, now let us ask what is the nature of this  critical point, is it a saddle point, is it a  13:14local minimum, is it a local maximum, can we say  that from the test? So, for that we have to find  13:18the Hessian matrix first. So, what is the Hessian  matrix? So, you have 2x plus 6y plus 2 let us  13:24take the partial with respect to x and y, so with  respect to x you get 2, with respect to y you  13:30get 6, so 6x plus 8y minus 4 the partial with  respect to x is 6, with respect to y is 8.  13:38And again this hessian does not depend on any  point, so at 2 comma minus 1 also it is the same  13:45matrix. Let us compute its determinant, so  determinant of H f of 2 comma minus 1 is  13:568 times 2 16 minus 6 times 6 is 36,  14:01so 16 minus 36 is minus 20 which is negative. So,  this tells us that 2 comma 1 is a saddle point  14:20of f x, y. So, let us view this function in Geogebra  14:24and check exactly what is happening at 2 comma  minus 1. So, here is the function f x, y is  14:30x squared plus 6xy plus  14:364y squared plus 2x minus 4y. So,  you can see that there is indeed  14:44something interesting going on here, it looks  like a, function looks quite nice actually.  14:49And if we view it like this let us see what  is happening at the point 2 comma minus 1. So,  14:53here is the point 2 comma minus 1 and you can  see right above the point 2 comma minus 1,  15:03there is that saddle, so that saddle is coming  at the point 2 comma minus 1 and indeed we are  15:10being able to detect that  using the Hessian matrix.  15:15Let us do this second example which is f  x, y is xy minus x cube minus y squared.  15:22So, let us find the gradient so the  gradient here is y minus 3x squared comma  15:32x minus 2y. So, if we equate this to 0.  15:47So, now we have 2 equations  15:52x is 2y and y is 3x squared. So, let us  substitute x is 2y in the first equation,  16:02so if we do that. So, one ok so one point we  already know at 0, 0, so the list of critical  16:07points one point we already know, one is 0,  0 let us see if there is any other point.  16:14So, for that we substitute x is 2y in the  first equation, so we get y is equal to 6 times  16:312y, my bad, 3 times 2y squared which is  12 times y squared which means y times  16:481 minus 12 y is 0. So, one option is y is  0 that is exactly the point 0 comma 0 that  16:56corresponds to the point 0 comma 0.  The other option is that y is not 0  17:01in which case 1 minus 12y must be 0, so which  means y must be 1 by 12. And if y is 1 by 12,  17:13then we can get x is 2 by 12 so which is  1 by 6 so this 1 by 6 comma 1 by 12.  17:21So, there are two critical points 0, 0 and 1 by  6 comma 1 by 12. Let us check the nature of these  17:26critical points, so for that we have to find the  Hessian matrix. So, I will take partials again,  17:33so y minus 3x squared the partial with respect to  x is minus 6x with respect to y is 1, x minus 2y  17:43partial with respect to x is 1 and partial with  respect to y is minus 2. So, at the point 0, 0  17:55this becomes 0 1 1 and minus 2, so the determinant  is negative, so this is minus 1 which is less than  18:170 and that tells us it is a saddle point.  So, therefore 0, 0 is a saddle point.  18:29The other critical point is 1 by 6 comma 1  by 12, let us find out what the Hessian is.  18:37So, if I substitute 1 by 6 in the 1, oneth  18:41place, I get minus 1 so minus 1 1 1 minus  2 so the determinant of the Hessian matrix  18:54is 2 minus 1 which is 1, so this is  positive, so we know this is either  18:59a local minimum or a local maximum. And for that  it is determined by the 1,1th term, so f x, x at  19:09of 1 by 6 comma 1 by 12 so that is a 1, oneth  term which is this term here and that is minus 1  19:17which is less than 0, so therefore 1  by 6 comma 1 by 12 is a local maximum.  19:28Let us see in Geogebra if this  is indeed what is happening.  19:32So, this is how the graph of the function  looks like in Geogebra and you can see at 0,  19:390 it really has very interesting behavior  19:43and that it is clearly a saddle point. So, if we  zoom in, let us see if I can come close to 0, 0.  19:52So at 0, 0 you can see at if you take  the, take it along the green line,  19:59then the function values it is like this, so it is  a local maximum, whereas if you take it along the  20:07other axis it is decreasing like  this, increasing a little and then  20:14it again goes down, so it is a local minimum  along that, so indeed it is like a saddle point,  20:21although it looks a bit different than  the standard saddle which is a little more  20:27clear to see. But it is clear that  at 0, 0 something strange happens.  20:32The more interesting point is 1 by 6 comma 1  by 12 that is a bit hard to pick up from the  20:37graph. So, here is that point, it is a bit  difficult to see but let us zoom in further and  20:43maybe we can see what is there, so now we  can see this point here, here is the point  20:48b which is 1 by 6 comma 1 by 12 and you can see  that close to this point the function is indeed  20:56sort of positive, so it is coming  down, remember at before 0, 0 from the  21:03on the other side it was coming down but then  just for a brief period it kind of goes up again  21:10and then it goes down and that is what is being  picked up by our Hessian matrix over there.  21:18So, this indeed conforms to our understanding of  what is happening. So, maybe here one can see,  21:26yeah. So, you can see from the graph it may not be  very easy to pick up these points but the algebra  21:33tells you what is happening and even from the  function directly the equation of the function  21:38it is not clear why this is a local maximum  but the second order test is going to,  21:45the Hessian test is going to tell you  that indeed it is a local maximum.  21:50Let us do this last example of f of x, y sin of  xy. So, we have computed the gradient for sin  21:56of xy, which let us write that down again, this  was y times cosine xy comma x times cosine xy.  22:07In fact we also wrote down the Hessian,  the Hessian was minus y squared sin of xy,  22:20then the other diagonal term is minus x squared  sin of xy and then the off diagonal terms were  22:28slightly more complicated. So, cosine of xy minus xy times  22:34sin of xy and then the same thing over  here by Clairaut theorem or by computation.  22:45So, this is how our Hessian matrix looks  like, so first what are the critical points.  22:50So, we actually know for this function  what is happening, we have seen a  22:54graph of this function and several times and we  know what is happening for this function because  23:01the local maxima or minima are actually  global maxima or minima and they are given by  23:08when the function this is a sin function, so it  takes the value 1 and minus 1 respectively.  23:13So, when does it take the value 1 when  x times y is of the form pi by 2 plus  23:20k times 2 pi where k is an integer. So, for all  such points the function takes the value 1, so the  23:29value 1 will be taken whenever x times y attains  one of those values so it is curves and we have  23:36actually seen this picture, we will see it again.  And similarly, when does it take the value minus 1  23:41when it is of the form 3 pi by 2 plus k  times 2 pi where k is an integer again  23:48and again that is a curve and on those  points it takes value minus 1.  23:53And the only other point which ends up  being a critical point is the following. So,  23:58let us equate, so equating gradient to 0,  we get, so two things can happen, one is  24:11cosine of xy is 0, the other is if cosine of  xy is not 0 then both x and y should be 0.  24:21So, cosine of xy is 0 is exactly the set of points  that I just said, so cosine of xy 0 means that  24:27sin of x y is plus or minus 1 because we know  that sin squared plus cosine squared is 1.  24:32So, this is the same as saying that sin of xy  is plus or minus 1, so plus 1 is exactly the  24:40set of local, global in fact maxima and minus  1 is exactly the set of global minimum. So, we  24:47know actually what happens at all these points, so  these are points that we are already understand.  24:53What happens at x is equal to y is equal to 0,  so this is the point that we do not know what  24:58happens. Well, it is fairly clear that this is  probably not a point of local maximum or local  25:06minimum, so most likely this is a saddle point and  let us see if our Hessian is telling us that.  25:13So, if you, if we compute our Hessian what do we  get? So, Hessian at 0, 0, so I should say Hessian  25:21at 0, 0, well, substitute x is y is 0, so the  diagonal entries become 0 what happens to the off  25:31diagonal entries? Well, x, y times sin xy becomes  0, so the only contributing term is cosine of xy  25:39that is cosine of 0 when x is y is 0 and cosine  of 0 we know is 1, so this is the matrix we get,  25:47this implies determinant of this matrix, so  sometimes this is called the Hessian determinant  25:54is minus 1 and that tells us that 0, 0  is a saddle point for this function.  26:06So, the point that was sort of  we were unsure of what happened,  26:11the test told us it is a saddle point.  Let us see what happens for those points  26:14for which we are sure of what happens,  let us see what happens to points where  26:20of this form where cosine of xy is 0 or sin of  xy is plus or minus 1. So, for points such that  26:35cosine xy is 0 let us compute the Hessian.  26:51So, as I said there are two options either sin of  xy is 1 or sin of xy is minus 1, let us say sin of  26:53x y is 1. So, there are two  options so I will say this or  27:05this and we will see what happens in both cases.  27:12So, if sine of xy is 1 then this gives me minus  y squared minus xy minus xy minus x square.  27:26And if sine of xy is minus 1, then this  gives me y squared x squared xy and xy.  27:42So, I will just reiterate that this is if  sine of xy is 1 and this is if sine of xy is  27:55minus 1. And what happens to the determinant? So, suppose we compute the determinant so the  28:05Hessian determinant. Well, you can see what  is happening, this is x squared y squared  28:11minus x squared y squared which is actually 0.  So, this test is inconclusive even though we  28:16actually know what is happening at these  points and the same thing happens here,  28:24this is also 0, x squared y squared  minus x squared y square.  28:27So, the point of this example is to say that the  Hessian test is a, has several features to it and  28:39what can happen is that points where it is  obvious that there are local maxima or local  28:43minima it may end up being inconclusive,  whereas points that we actually do not know  28:48what is happening from the function it gives  us a result, so such things can happen.  28:53So, the Hessian test it is not a full proof test  but it is our first step towards understanding  29:03critical points. So, we have studied  the Hessian test in this video for f x,  29:07y we will study this in the forthcoming video  for more number of variables. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.