---
title: "L12.1: Higher order partial derivatives and the Hessian matrix :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L12.1: Higher order partial derivatives and the Hessian matrix :: IITM Online Degree

L12.1: Higher order partial derivatives and the Hessian matrix

Transcript Language

English

00:15Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component of the online BSc program on Data Science00:18and Programming. This video is about higher order partial derivatives and the Hessian00:23matrix. So, in the earlier video, we studied the notion of critical points for multivariable00:30functions. So, what that meant was that you take the function f is a scalar valued multivariable00:38function, and then you find its gradient and then you set it to 0.00:43And you compute all those points for which those equations are satisfied, which means00:49that the gradient at that point is 0 or the other thing that can happen is that one or00:55more partial derivatives are undefined. So, you collect together all those points and01:01those are called the critical points of F.01:03And the reason we were interested in studying these was that the local extrema, meaning01:11local maxima or local minima are all critical points. So, they satisfy that the gradient01:18is 0, or maybe some partial is not defined. So, they must satisfy one of these. And the01:23intuition there was that the tangent plane is parallel to the x-y plane or in general01:29x1 x2 xn hyperplane.01:31In one variable calculus, we have studied that there is a second order test, meaning01:39a test using the second derivative, and that allows us to classify which of these critical01:45points are local maxima, local minima or saddle points, and sometimes it can fail also. So,01:52we would like an analogue of such a test for the multivariable case. And in order to do02:02that, we will first study the notion of higher order partial derivatives and the Hessian02:08matrix.02:09So, let us recall what are partial derivatives first, suppose f of x1 x2 1 is a scalar valued02:15multivariable function defined on a domain D in Rn. The partial derivative of f with02:21respect to the variable xi is the function denoted by f subscript xi, or del f del xi.02:28And it is defined by taking the limit as h tends to 0, f of x tilde plus h times ei,02:34what is ei, ei is the ith unit vector in Rn minus f of x tilde divided by h.02:43So, this is the definition of the partial derivative function of f with respect to the02:50ith variable xi. And this domain, it need not always, this limit may not always be,02:57it need not always exist. And so the domain of this function, the partial derivative is03:03all those points within D where this limit does exist.03:09And what does the partial derivative do, the partial derivative at a point measures the03:14rate of change of the function in the direction of the standard versus vector ei at the point03:22a tilde. So, or equivalently with respect to the variable xi, meaning it treats the03:30function as a function of only xi.03:32So, you restrict to that line parallel to the xi axis passing through a tilde and restrict03:42your function to that line and then ask what is the, how is the function changing? What03:47is the rate of change of that function? That is exactly what the ith partial derivative03:51does.03:52So, now the partial derivative is a function. And so, you can say what is the partial derivative03:57of that function, the partial derivative is a scalar valued multivariable function, and04:02we can very well ask what is the partial derivative of that function and that is exactly what04:07are second order partial derivatives for f x, y.04:12So, if f of x, y is a function defined in a domain D in Rn, then the second order partial04:18derivatives of f are the partial derivatives of the partial derivatives. So, you take partial04:23derivatives and then you again take partial derivatives. So, just for the sake of simplicity,04:30the notations are either f subscript xx or del squared f del x squared. So, note this04:38strange thing that the notation here is del squared f del x squared and not del squared04:44f del squared x. So, this is for something that will come ahead.04:53The other possibility is that you have fyy which is also del squared f del y square and05:01the third possibility is that you have fxy, which is the same as del squared f or del05:07y del x or and the fourth possibilities fyx, which is del squared f del x del y. So, what05:15do these mean? So, fxx means, you consider the partial derivative f with respect to x,05:22of f with respect to x and then take the partial derivative of that function again with respect05:29to x.05:30So, f subscript x again subscript x or the other way of writing this del del x of the05:37function del f del x. So, del f del x is the function the partial with respect to x and05:43then you take the partial again with respect to x. Similarly, if you have fyy, what that05:48means is you take partial with respect to y and then again take partial with respect05:52to y equivalently you could write it as del del y of del f del y. What is fxy?06:00So, this is where you first take the partial with respect to x and then take the partial06:06with respect to y of that function, which is the same as saying you take del del y of06:13del f del x and then here this is fy subscript x and this is del del x of del f del y. So,06:25now, just notice one small thing, this is a fairly obvious but sometimes students make06:32mistakes with this.06:34In the notation when you do fxy so, here the order is first differentiate with respect06:44to x, then take partial with respect to y, but when you write it like this, it gets kind06:51of flipped over, so you have to remember that this means first take partial with respect06:57to x, and then take partial with respect to y. So, because of the notation on the right07:06is sort of saying you take del del of something and that is why it is written like this.07:12Whereas, on the left, it is x is coming on the right, the variables are coming on the07:17right, that is why you write it like this. So, you have to just remember that when you07:21go between these 2, whatever is written here, gets it in the opposite order towards the07:26left, so the subscript notation gets written towards the right, the del del notation gets07:34written towards the left, this is what you should remember, because this is a common07:38source of errors.07:39Now, it would be of course, convenient if we could flip these as we want. Like, if we07:45have fxy and fyx, then we can interchange them. That would be very convenient. And indeed,07:53we will soon see a theorem that says that if your function is nice, meaning under some08:01hypothesis, indeed, that does happen.08:04Let us start with some examples. So, let us compute all the second order partial derivatives08:09of these functions. So first, what are the first order partial derivatives, so del f08:14del x. So, we have actually computed these before is 1, del f del y is 1. And so del08:22squared del x squared is the partial of the function del f del x, which is 1, so the partial08:30of that is 0, because it is a constant, then del squared f del y squared is similarly 0,08:39in fact all these functions are 0; del squared f del x del y is also 0 and del squared f08:47del y del x is also 0.08:51And indeed do notice that here, these two are equal. So, at least for easy functions,08:59it may happen that these two are often equal. So, it does not matter in which order you09:04do your partial differentiation, the answer will be the same. Let us see if that holds09:10for this as well. So, you have f of x, y is sin of x, y, we have again computed the gradient09:17here, so we know what the partial derivatives look like.09:20So, this is y times cosine of x y, and x times cosine of x y. Now, let us look at the higher09:33order partial derivatives. So, if you have del squared f del x squared, that means you09:38have to differentiate y times cosine x, y with respect to x. Now y is a constant, so09:47it will come out so you are just differentiating cosine of x y. So, this is y times, y times09:57minus sin of x y times y. So, this is minus y squared sin of x y.10:06Now, by symmetry or by doing it, you can see that del squared f del y squared is also minus10:17x squared times sin x y. So, I will suggest you check this. So, this leaves us with the10:25mixed partial derivatives. So, del x del y and del squared f del y del x. So, for del10:36squared f del x del y, we first differentiate with respect to y so that gives us x cosine10:41x, y and then differentiate with respect to x. So, this is your product rule.10:46So, let us differentiate x first, that is 1, so 1 times cosine of x y and then hold10:53x and differentiate cosine of x y. So, that gives us y times, minus y times sin of x y.11:03So, what this gives us is cosine of x y minus x y times sin of x y. So, that is what it11:16gives us. And then by symmetry or by computing it, maybe we can compute it. So, this is again11:231 times cosine of x y. So, I am now differentiating y times cosine x with respect to y. So, 111:30times cosine of x y plus y times minus x, sin of x y, which gives us cosine of x y minus11:47x times, minus x y times sin of x y.11:51And again, you can see that these two are indeed equal. So, it seems that the mixed12:00partials are indeed often equal. Maybe I should have mentioned in the previous slide that12:06these are called the mixed partials, the mixed partial derivatives. So, as I was saying,12:23the mixed partial derivatives, at least in these examples seem to be equal.12:27And indeed, we have a very nice theorem called Clairaut s theorem about the mixed partials.12:32So, it says the following, so suppose f of x, y is a function defined on a domain D in12:37R2 containing a point A and an open ball around it. If the second order mixed partial derivatives,12:42fxy and fyx are continuous in an open ball around a, then they are equal at a.12:50So, what do we need to check that these mixed partial derivatives are continuous in an open12:58ball around a. Now, in our previous examples, they were all very nice functions. So, continuity13:04was not at all a problem. And from there, we could as a result, apply Clairaut s theorem.13:10And we saw that they are equal although we actually computed them, but we could have13:15directly concluded it from Clairaut s theorem.13:18So, let us see an example where we will try to compute all these and see that the hypothesis13:25is indeed necessary. So, let us compute what are the partial derivatives. So, first of13:33all, what is the left del x and del f del y at 0, 0. So, del f del x at 0, 0 is limit13:47h tends to 0, f of 0 plus h comma 0 minus f of 0 comma 0 divided by h. So, f of 0 plus14:08h, that is f of h comma 0, that is again 0 minus 0 by h, this is 0 and so this is going14:16to be 0 by the same argument, the partial for y is also 0.14:24So, we know that these two are 0. Of course, we have to compute now the partial derivatives14:30at the other points as well. So, now let us do that. So, what is del f del x at x y where14:39x y is not equal to 0, 0. So, x, y is not equal to 0, 0, then this is a rational function14:45and the denominator is non-zero so I can apply my u by v rule. So, if we do that, let us14:50see what we get.14:51So, this is x squared plus y squared times the derivative of the numerator. So, that14:59gives us y time x squared minus y squared plus x y times 2x minus x y times x squared15:16minus y squared times 2x divided by x squared plus y squared. So, now if we simplify this,15:28and I will not spend time on, on doing this, since it is a direct simplification, what15:34we are going to get is something like minus y to the power 5 plus x to the 4 times y,15:50plus 4x squared y cubed divided by x squared plus y squared squared. And this is if of15:58course, x, y is not equal to 0.16:04And you can do the same thing for del f del y. And if we do that, what you will get is,16:10again, you use a u by v rule and go through the expressions, you will get exactly the16:17same thing. Except that now the x term the highest x term comes with a positive sign16:27and the lower ones come with a negative sign. So, x cube y squared divided by x squared16:43plus y squared squared.16:44So, it is kind of symmetric, except that there is this gap between the plus and the minus16:49and that gap is exactly what is going to cause the second order partials to not work out16:58properly. So, so this is what is. And now let us compute what is the second order partial,17:05mixed partials for at 0, 0. So, at 0, 0, I want to compute what is del squared of del17:12x del y 0, 0.17:15So, what does this mean this means I have to compute limit h tends to 0 the partial17:24of y at, so this with respect to h, so h comma 0 minus del f del x at 0, 0 divided by h.17:39So, what is the partial derivative, that h comma 0 this is so limit h tends to 0, h to17:48the power 5 minus everything else is 0 because the y coordinate is 0, and then divided by18:04the numerator and then divided by x squared plus 0 squared squared, which is h to the18:10power 4.18:11So, we will simplify this in a minute, what is the partial of x at 0, 0 that we have computed18:18that is 0 and then divided by h. So if we do this, this is h to h minus 0 by h limit18:24h tends to 0 which is 1. Now, let us compute delta squared f del y del x at 0, 0. So, this18:36is limit h tends to 0 the del f del x at 0 comma h minus del f del x at 0 comma 0 I seen18:48the previous one, I have made a typo this should have been del f del y but it is the18:53same, the answer does not change as such divided by h and now we can again do the same thing.19:02So, what is del f del x at 0 comma h. So, we have found out here that it is minus h19:09to the power 5 and all the other terms do not contribute because there is a x in there19:14and the x we have to substitute is 0. So, minus h to the power 5 and then the denominator19:19is 0 squared plus x squared squared minus 0 divided by h and limit as h tends to 0 and19:28you can see now this is minus 1 and so these do not match. So, this do not match.19:37So, what was the problem? The problem was that these mixed partials are actually not19:46continuous. So, for that, you will have to evaluate what they are and check what happens.19:52So, the hypothesis in Clairaut s theorem is important, and without that, it may not be20:00happen that the mixed partials are indeed equal. So, for whatever is next we will assume20:07in that the hypothesis of Clairaut's theorem holds, because we want that to hold in order20:15to get whatever the second order partials are useful for fine.20:22So, we have done second order partial derivatives for fxy. Now, let us talk about second partials20:28for f x1 x2 xn. So, if f x1 x2 xn is a function defined on the domain D in Rn, then the second20:34order partial derivatives are defined analogously as a partial derivatives of the partial derivatives.20:39So, here there are for the n is 2 case there were 4 second order partial derivatives. So,20:51for the general case there are going to be n squared second order partial derivatives.20:58So, they are given by f xi xi or del squared f xi xi. So, what this means is you take f21:06with respect to xi and again with respect to xi or the same thing del del xi of del21:12f del xi. This is when i is equal to j if i is not equal to j or meaning this is a general21:20situation, then this is f xi and then you take the partial of xj of that which is the21:29same as saying you take del del xj of del f del xi.21:34So, again, important point is to notice here how here it is written on the right, and so21:41it goes, the order is from left to right, here it is written towards the left and so21:48the order is from right to left. That is the only thing you have to recall, remember, as21:53far as notation is concerned. And the other difference meaning why did I write it differently?21:58See, here the notations are same f xi xi, here xixj. So, it does not matter if i and22:04j are different or i and j are the same, but when you write it in terms of this del notation,22:12the del xi del xi becomes del xi squared. This is just convention, there is no reason22:17for this notation other than convention.22:19Fine, let us do this example. If x y is xy plus yz plus zx, let us first compute the22:28partial so del f del x is y plus z. Again we have done this example before meaning the22:35partials first order partials before this is x plus z or z plus x and del f del z is22:44x plus y. And so if I want the second order partials, I differentiate these. So, del squared22:51del x squared is 0 del squared del x del y del x is. So, you take the function y plus23:03z and differentiate with respect to y. So, this is 1 del squared del f del z del x is23:101.23:11And I think you can see the general pattern emerging so I will write it as del squared23:16del y squared is 0 del squared f del z squared is 0 and then del squared f del z del y this23:29is the partial of the function del f del y which is x plus z. So, partial of x plus z23:36with respect to z that is 1 and again if we know that the partials are, the second order23:47partials are nice then the mixed partials are actually the order does not matter.23:51So, from Clairaut's theorem or an equivalent version of the theorem in n dimensions, you23:58can check that del squared f del x del y is also equal to 1 which is also del squared24:07f del y del z which is 1 and then del squared f del maybe I want a del x here and then del24:18y del z all these are 1. So, you can check this directly from the expressions for del24:25f the first order partials or you can use the fact that Clairaut's theorem applies.24:33So, I will make that as a comment in this slide. So, before which let us define the24:45higher order partial derivatives. So, you can keep repeating this process. So, you have24:49the second order partials you can take the third order partials, fourth order partials.24:54So, for one variable functions, you can differentiate as many times as you want provided the derivative25:01exists. So, the same thing can be done for partial derivative, you can take partial derivatives25:06as many times as you want. And that is exactly what higher order partial derivatives do.25:12So, if f x1 x2 xn is a function defined in a domain D in Rn, then the higher order partial25:18derivatives of f are defined analogously by taking successive partial derivatives. So,25:23the general notation so, if you take the kth order partial derivative, the notations are25:27f xi 1, xi 2, xi k which means you take the partial with respect to xi 1, then you take25:36the partial with respect to xi 2, then you take the partial with respect to xi 3 and25:41all the way up to xi k, this is what it means.25:47And you can write the same thing except remember our usual thing about the shift in the order.25:56So, this is exactly the same as taking del del xi of xi k of del del xi k minus 1 of26:06del del xi k minus 2 of all the way up to del f del xi 1 and then plenty of brackets,26:23however. So, I hope the idea is clear, it is exactly the same thing. Of course, once26:29again one should point out that there is no guarantee that this higher order partial derivative26:38exists the same way as there is no guarantee that the first order partial derivative exists.26:42So, there will be some points where it exists some points it may not exist and so, the domain26:47of this function is whichever points it exists and an appropriately modified statement of26:54Clairaut's theorem holds. What that means is, if suppose you take the kth order partial26:58derivatives, then if all the, if this guy is continuous and so is in the neighborhood27:06and so is any, you take this denominator in some other order, if that kth order partial27:18is also continuous in some neighborhood, then they are going to match at the point, at any27:23point in that neighborhood.27:25So, in general what you can say is under suitable hypothesis, you can shift the orders without27:38any problem. So, if I do xi 1, xi 2, xi k that is the same as doing it in some other27:48order xij 1, xij 2, xij k. So, some confusing combinatory it maybe, but all I am saying28:00is you change the order of 1 1 through k instead of x1 x2 x3, you could have x2 x3 x1 and that28:07is allowed under suitable hypothesis.28:10Finally, let us talk about the Hessian matrix which is really what all this is going to28:18be used for. So, the Hessian matrix is the following if you have a function of n variables28:23defined on domain D in Rn, then the Hessian matrix of f is defined as this complicated28:30looking n by n matrix. So, remember that you had n squared second order partial derivatives,28:36so, you place them in a matrix.28:40So, the first row is you take all your, you take your gradient vector and then you take28:48the partial with respect to x1 of each component of that gradient vector. So, del squared f28:52del x1 squared del squared f del x1 del x2 del squared f del x1 xj. So, this is the jth29:00column del squared f del x1 del xn that is the last column. And then for the second row29:07you take del del x2 of the gradient vector. So, del del f del squared f del x2 del x1,29:14del squared f del x2 del x2, then del squared f del x2 del xj, del squared f del x2 del29:21xn and then in general this is ith row.29:26So, the important part is you have to remember what happens for the ijth entry. That is how29:31you describe any matrix by saying what happens to the ijth entry. So, the ijth entry is given29:36by taking del squared f del xi del xj. This is what if you remember. So, that is what29:41is happening. So, this is the Hessian matrix and this is somehow going to come in, this29:53is somehow going to be useful when we talk about the second derivative test whatever,30:00so the analog of the second derivative test when we classify critical points.30:04Fine, let us do a couple of examples. So, for this example, x plus y, we saw that the30:11second order partials are actually all 0. So, the Hessian here is 0 0 0 0. So, this30:20was a relatively complicated Hessian, sin x y. So, it is of, it is a 2 by 2 because30:27you have two variables. And the terms here are. So, this is minus y squared sin x y minus30:46x squared sin x y and then this was a cosine of x y minus x y times sin of x y then this31:02was cosine of x y minus x y times sin of x y. So, these terms typically match. So, often31:09for the Hessian matrix, these terms will match.31:13And then let us do this one. This one was again rather easy matrix. Now, this is a 331:20by 3 matrix, why 3, because there are 3 variables. So, what was this matrix? This was 0 1 1;31:271 0 1 and 1 1 0, the kind of matrices we found in linear algebra were somewhat useful. And31:37indeed, we will have some use of linear algebra when we study this hessian matrix in the context31:44of the classification of critical points. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.