---
title: "Week 07 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# Week 07 - Tutorial 01 :: IITM Online Degree

Week 07 - Tutorial 01

Transcript Language

English

00:15Hello everyone. In this lecture, in this tutorial  video we will talk about similar matrices. So,  00:21let us take an example. So, we start with  some linear transformation T of x, y, z  00:27is x, x plus y and x plus z. So, this is a linear  transformation, from R3 to R3 and now we consider  00:39ordered basis, so this is beta 1, this is the  standard ordered basis we are considering 1, 0, 0;  00:470, 1, 0 and 0, 0, 1. So, this is  the standard ordered basis.  00:53Let us consider another ordered basis beta  2, let us take beta 2 as this 1, 0, 1;  01:030, 1, 1 and 1, 1, 0. So, if we write the matrix  representation with respect to both the ordered  01:17basis, so T with respect to beta 1, and for the  domain and codomain in both places if we consider  01:24the basis to be beta 1, then this will give us  the matrix. So, let us write it T of 1, 0, 0  01:35that is nothing but 1 comma 1 comma 1; T  of 0, 1, 0 that is the matrix, so 0, 1, 0  01:52and T of 0, 0, 1 this will give us 0, 0, 1.  02:02So, the matrix we got here, so this matrix  is nothing but first column will be 1, 1,  02:101; second column will be 0, 1, 0 and  the third column will be 0, 0, 1.  02:17So, this is the matrix representation with respect  to standard ordered basis. Now, similarly if we  02:24calculate T of these vectors in beta 2 and we  write, we then get T of 1, 0, 1 is nothing but  02:341, 1, 2. T of 0, 1, 1 is nothing but 0,  1, 1 and T of 1, 1, 0 is 1, 2, 1.  02:52Now, 1, 1, 2 we can write, express in terms  in a linear combination of vectors in beta 2.  02:59So, we will get 1 into 1, 0, 1 plus 1 into  0, 1, 1 plus 0 into 1, 1, 0. Similarly, we  03:16can express the other two also, so the matrix we  get is T beta 2 is given by 1, 1, 0; 0, 1, 0 and  03:360, 1, 1. So, I want all of you to check this  representation. You can express all the images  03:44these vectors and these vectors as a  linear combination of vectors in beta 2  03:49and then write the matrix representation. So, we get T beta 1 and T beta 2,  03:54those are the matrix representation with  respect to beta 1 and beta 2 respectively.  03:59Now, these two matrix are similar, but for similar  matrix we know that there should exists some,  04:07so let us denote this matrix as A for removing the  complication of notation and this matrix as B.  04:16So, for as A and B are similar matrix, so there  should exists some P such that P B P inverse  04:28is A or even you can write A is nothing but P  inverse, sorry B is nothing but P inverse AP.  04:41So either of these, basically I just change the  size, sides of P. So, we want to find this P.  04:49What will be this P? So, what we got till now,  04:52till now we got that if we consider beta  1 for both domain and codomain we get the  04:59matrix A as the representation of linear  transformation. Similarly, for beta 2,  05:04we got the matrix B. So, now if we represent  this beta 2 in terms of beta 1, then we get  05:16the change of basis matrix that will give us  the matrix P. So, what we have to do? We have to  05:24do, we have to express the vectors of  beta 2 in terms of vectors of beta 1.  05:30So, here beta 2 is nothing but 1, 0, beta  2 is nothing but 1, 0, 1; 0, 1, 1 and  05:421, 1, 0. Now we have to express this in terms  of beta 1, beta 1 is our standard ordered basis.  05:50So, this is 0, 1, 0 and 0, 0, 1. So, this is the  standard ordered basis. So, we have to express,  06:01we have to express beta 2 in terms of  06:12beta 1. So, this is the matrix which we  get in this process, we will is called as  06:19change of basis matrix. So, let us try to write 1, 0, 1 in terms of  06:27standard ordered basis so which is nothing but 1  into the first one 1, 0, 0; 0 into the second one  06:350, 1, 0 and 1 into the third one 0, 0, 1.  So, similarly for the other two vectors we  06:44can write this expression, so this is nothing but  the matrix which we get by taking the vectors of  06:52beta 2 as the columns of this matrix. So,  the matrix we get is the column of this,  07:00we replace the columns with  the vectors in beta 2. So,  07:07this is the matrix we get, this is the change  of basis matrix and we denote it by P.  07:15Now, if we calculate P of B we  will get 1, 0, 1; 1, 1, 2 and 2, 1,  07:301\. So, this is our P of B. And if we calculate  A into P so this is the matrix P into B  07:40and A into P will give us the same matrix 1, 0, 1;  1, 1, 2; 2, 1, 1. I want you to check verify this  07:50two, these two matrices PB and AP. So, what we get  here? We get PB is equal to AP. So, B equal to P  08:02inverse AP. So, we can verify that this A and B  are really a similar matrix, but P is constructed  08:15by expressing beta 2 in terms of beta 1. Now, in the same example we have not changed  08:21the linear transformation and we  have also taken the beta 2, the basis  08:26as 1, 0, 1; 0, 1, 1 and 1, 1, 0 as earlier. So,  this beta, B matrix we have calculated earlier.  08:34Similarly, if we take the another basis  beta 3 as 1, 0, 0; 1, 1, 0 and 1, 1, 1  08:41you can calculate the matrix representation,  you can verify it that it will be C.  08:46Now, in this case we have also got two matrices  B and C by just changing the basis. So,  08:56this B and C will be similar and we want to find,  we want to find some matrix Q such that QC Q  09:09inverse will be B. That means, C will be Q inverse  BQ. We want to find this Q. Now, how we can find  09:21this Q? We have to express beta 3, the vectors in  beta 3 in terms of the vectors in beta 2. We have  09:32to find this matrix and that will be our Q. So, let us try to write the first vector 1, 0, 0  09:40in terms of the vectors of beta 2.  So, that is nothing but a into this  09:46plus b into 0, 1, 1 and c into 1, 1, 0.  So, what we get here? We get a plus c  09:58and this b plus c and a plus b. So, our  a plus b will be 1; b plus c will be 0  10:09and a plus, sorry the first one is a plus c,  a plus c will be 1, and the last one is a plus  10:14b that is 0. So, we got, we get 3 equations  and if we solve it we will get a to be half,  10:23b to be minus half and c to be half. So, similarly we can express the other two vectors  10:31which are 1, 1, 0 and 1, 1, 1 in terms of  vectors in beta 2 and if we write all these  10:42things in the columns, as the coefficients as the  columns of a matrix, then we get the matrix Q.  10:49And I want all of you to verify that this is  nothing but half, minus half, half which we  10:55have already checked and the next one will be 0,  0, 1 and the last one will be half, half and half.  11:07So, this is our matrix Q. Now if you  calculate BQ, you will get half, 0, half;  11:21half, 1, 3 by 2 and half, 1, half. So, this is the  matrix BQ and which will be same as QC. So, if you  11:35take product of Q and C and B and  Q, you will get the same matrix.  11:40So, we will get C equal to Q inverse BQ, where  Q is nothing but the change of basis matrix.  11:49So, how we can get Q? We just  express all the vectors in beta 3  11:55in terms of the vectors in beta 2. I will write  this coefficient, this a, b and c for each case.  12:02So, write a, b and c as the column of the  matrix of Q. So, that is how we can calculate  12:10Q and that is how we get, you can verify that two  matrices are similar matrix or not. So, whenever  12:17there is a change of basis and we get two  representation of a linear transformation  12:23with respect to that basis, then those two  matrices are similar matrices. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.