---
title: "L8.2: What is an orthonormal basis? :: IITM Online Degree"
---

# L8.2: What is an orthonormal basis? :: IITM Online Degree

L8.2: What is an orthonormal basis?

Transcript Language

English

00:14Hello, and welcome to the Maths 2 component  of the online B.Sc. program on data science  00:18and programming. In this video, we are going  to talk about what is an orthonormal basis.  00:23So, let us just recall first that we  have defined what is an orthogonal set.  00:28So, an orthogonal set of vectors v1, v2, vk  in an inner product space is a set of vectors  00:33whose elements are mutually orthogonal. That  means, if you take the inner product vi,vj,  00:38where i is not equal to j, then this is 0. So, we checked in the previous video that an  00:47orthogonal set of vectors is linearly independent.  And that is why if you take a maximal orthogonal  00:54set of vectors, then it is a maximal linearly  independent set. And we have seen before that a  00:59maximal linearly independent set is a basis. So,  this is one way of getting a basis for an inner  01:05product space. So, this is somewhat special. If  you have an inner product on your vector space,  01:09this is a slightly enhanced  way of getting a basis. So,  01:15such a basis was called an orthogonal basis. So, what is an orthonormal set? So, we are going  01:21to use these two terms, an orthonormal  set and a basis and put them together  01:25and we will get an orthogonal, orthonormal  basis. So, an orthonormal set of vectors  01:30in an inner product space is an orthogonal set  of vectors. So, that means the inner product of  01:38vi and vj is 0 for all i not equal to j, such  that the norm of each vector of the set is 1.  01:44So, let is recall that, if you have an inner  product, it automatically gives you a norm that is  01:49if you have a vector v and you take the inner  product of v,v, then that is a positive number,  01:57non-negative number and if you take its  square root, that gives you the norm. So,  02:01that is defined as the norm of the vector. So, explicitly, what this means is if you have  02:07a set v1, v2, vk then S is an orthonormal set  of vectors if the inner product of vi and vj is  02:130 for i and j in 1 through k and i is not equal to  j, and the norm of vi is 1. So, just to explicitly  02:22say that norm of vi is 1 is the same as saying  that inner product of vi,vi is equal to 1.  02:31So, here, of course, we do not take square  root because a square root of 1 is 1. So,  02:37we know that if the norm is 1, this is the  same as saying the inner product is 1.  02:44So, as an example, let us consider R4 with the  usual inner product, that is the dot product. So,  02:50then the set minus 1 by root 3, 1 by root 3, 1 by  root 3, 0, 2 by root 42, 1 by root 42, 1 by root  02:5742, 6 by root 42 and two-third, 0, two-thirds,  minus one-third is an orthonormal set of vectors.  03:03So, this example, we have sort of  seen a similar example before.  03:09And the idea is here we have made them  all into a norm, we have made all of them  03:14to have norm 1. So, if you take the  norm, so norm of the first vector is,  03:22so this is the usual inner product, so the norm is  just given by taking each component, squaring it,  03:27and adding it up. So, that gives us one-third  plus one-third plus one-third, which is 1.  03:34So, similarly here, if you take the norm,  that is going to give you 4 by 42 plus  03:421 by 42 plus 1 by 42 plus 36 by 42, which  is indeed 1. And similarly, over here,  03:51the norm is going to be given by two-third square  plus two-third square plus minus one-third square,  03:56that is 4 by 9 plus 4 by 9 plus 1 by 9,  which is 1. So, all these have norm 1. And  04:07you can check that the inner product is  0 if you take two different vectors.  04:12So, for that, since all of them have the same  denominator, you can ignore the denominator and  04:20take the inner product and you can see clearly  that the norm is indeed 0, sorry, the inner  04:25product is indeed 0. So, I hope it is clear what  is an orthonormal set. It is just an orthogonal  04:32set with the additional property that the norms  of each of the vectors in that set is 1.  04:37So, now, what is an orthonormal basis? So,  we know what is an orthonormal set. So, now,  04:44an orthonormal set which forms a  basis is an orthonormal basis. So,  04:48this is similar to what we saw for the orthogonal  basis, namely, an orthogonal basis was one where  04:55it was an orthogonal set and it was a basis.  So, here an orthonormal basis is one where it is  05:01a basis and it is an orthonormal set.  05:05So, equivalently an orthonormal basis is  an orthogonal basis where the norm of each  05:12vector is 1. So, because an orthogonal  set is, orthonormal set is nothing but  05:18an orthogonal set where each vector has norm 1 and  orthonormal basis in particular is an orthogonal  05:24basis where each vector has norm 1. So, equivalently, an orthonormal basis is  05:32a maximal orthonormal set. So, just to make it  clear what we mean by that, that means this set  05:37is an orthonormal set and there is no set which is  bigger than this, which properly contains this set  05:45and which is also an orthonormal set. So, this  is the largest possible orthonormal set you can  05:50get. You cannot expand this set further and  retain the property of being orthonormal.  05:59So, here is an example. The standard basis  with respect to the usual inner product  06:03forms an orthonormal basis, maybe let us  check that quickly before going ahead.  06:10So, I have the vectors ei. So, we already  know that if you take ei,ej, then this is  06:24and i is not equal to j, then  this inner product is going to be,  06:28so if you work this out, 0 times 0 plus 0 times  0 all the way, so, there is a lot of 0s.  06:35And then when you come to the ith place,  you will get a 0, sorry, a 1 time 0.  06:41And when you come to the jth place,  06:44you will get 0 times 1, this is if i is larger  than, sorry, less than j then you get this. If  06:51i is larger than j then the 0 times 1  comes first and the 1 times 0 comes next,  06:58either way the point is you get this to be 0. So, this inner product is 0 and the norm of ei,  07:10so that is ei,ei, so, well, square root of  this, so then if you do the same computation,  07:18you get 0 times 0 plus bunch of 0s. And then in  the ith place there is one in each component,  07:25so 1 times 1 and then again 0s. So, this  gives you, I should have square root of this,  07:34so which is square root of 1. And of course, when we say square  07:39root and we are talking about norms, we  always take the positive square root,  07:42so, this is again 1. So, this is an example of  an orthonormal basis. It is an orthogonal basis.  07:49Well, we already know it is a basis. It is  an orthogonal set that is what we checked  07:54over here. So, here we checked it is orthogonal  and here we checked it is orthonormal.  08:02Let us do another example. So, consider R3  with the usual inner product and the set  08:08one-third 1, 2, 2, one-third minus 2,  minus 1, 2 and one-third 2, minus 2, 1,  08:14then this set which we have called beta is  an orthonormal basis. So, let us check this.  08:22So, let us look at the norms first. So, let  us give these names. So, let us call this,  08:27let us call the first vector v1. So, we  have v1, v2 and v3. So, the norm of v1 is  08:38square root of, so, typically, if you want to, if  you want to check that something has norm 1, then  08:45it is enough to check that its square is 1. So, instead of checking that norm v1 is 1, I will  08:51be checking norm of v1 squared is 1. So, norm of  v1 squared is just the inner product of v1 itself,  08:57which we can compute easily.  So, this is one-third 1, 2, 2,  09:05one-third 1, 2, 2, and that is 1 by 9 times 1  times 1 plus 2 times 2 plus 2 times 2 which is  09:181 plus 4 plus 4 so 9 by 9 which is 1. The same, the same thing is going to happen  09:26if you take v2, norm of v2 which is one-third  minus 2, minus 1, 2, one-third minus 2, minus 1,  09:332\. So, this is giving us 1 by 9 times minus  2 times minus 2 plus minus 1 times minus 1  09:51plus 2 times 2, which is 9 by 9, which  is 1. Maybe I will leave norm v3 square  10:02to you. So, check that this is 1. And then we are left with these three  10:06inner products. So, let us check v1, v2 what is  the inner product. So, we have one-third 1, 2, 2,  10:13and one-third minus 2, minus 1, 2. So, again, the  tip here is, if you want to check that the inner  10:20product is 0, then these constants you can remove  out and check for the term inside, which if it  10:29is better term, so in this case,  for example, you have integers,  10:34then you would rather check that. So, in this case, you get 1 by 9 times  10:401 times minus 2 plus 2 times minus 1 plus 2 times  2. So, that gives us minus 2 minus 2 plus 4. So,  10:49that is 0. I will again encourage you to check  the other terms. So, this shows that this is  10:54an orthonormal basis. Why is it a basis? We  have checked here that this is an orthonormal  11:01set, but the reason it is a basis is  because it is a maximal orthonormal set.  11:08Meaning, this is a set of size 3 and you already  know it is a linearly independent set, because  11:17if it is an orthonormal set, it is in particular  an orthogonal set, which we have checked is  11:22linearly independent. So, this is a, so I should  end this by saying once you finish this checking,  11:28this will so, this part will show and along  with v3 will show that the norms are 1.  11:36This part if you finish, so  check also that v1, v3 is v2, v3  11:43is 0, this will, altogether will  show that it is orthogonal. And then  11:50the cardinality of beta is 3 and  beta is linearly independent,  11:59because it is orthogonal and we  know that dimension of R3 is 3.  12:07So, that implies that beta  is an orthonormal basis,  12:15so because the sizes match. So, you have  a linearly independent set of size which  12:21is equal to the dimension of the vector space  that is why it is a basis. So, in particular,  12:27it is an orthonormal basis in this case. So, we have, I hope this gives you a window  12:33into how to check something is a basis. Sometimes  you happen to not know an explicit basis, but you  12:38know the dimension of the space in consideration,  so you can check that something is a basis.  12:44So, let us talk about obtaining  orthonormal sets from orthogonal sets.  12:48So, suppose you have inner product space, an inner  product space and if gamma is a set v1, v2, vk,  12:55which is orthogonal, so it is an orthogonal set  of vectors. So, then we can obtain an orthonormal  13:00set of vectors which let us call it beta from  gamma by the following procedure. You take each  13:06of these vectors and divide it by its norm then we  are claiming that this is an orthonormal set.  13:12So, why is it an orthonormal set? So, the reason  is because this is exactly what we did in the  13:19previous example. Each of those vectors was  divided by its norm which made it orthonormal  13:26and the orthogonality was evident already from  just the integer part. So, here also that is  13:31what is happening. So, here we have that v1, v2  is, so let us say vivj is 0, so this will imply  13:42that vi by norm vi, vj by norm vj is 0. And so, this is orthogonal. So, this new  13:54set is orthogonal beta. So, the only  thing that is remaining to check  13:59is what is a norm. So, if you take the norm of vi  by norm vi, well, constants come out of the norm.  14:07So, you get 1 by norm vi times norm vi, which is  1. So, that is why this is an orthonormal set.  14:15So, let us consider R2 with the usual  inner product and the orthogonal basis  14:19gamma one-third, minus 3, 1. So, we can make  this into an orthonormal basis by looking at  14:30the norms of each of these vectors and then  dividing by the term. So, the norm of both of  14:34these vectors turns out to be root 10. So, if you  do 1 by root 10 times 1, 3 and then 1 by root 10,  14:421 by root 10 times minus 3, 1 this  is an orthonormal basis for R2.  14:50So, the fact that it is an orthogonal set is  already because gamma was orthogonal. The fact  14:57that it is orthonormal set is because we divided  by the norms. And the fact that it is a basis,  15:02well, gamma was already a basis. So, from there it  follows this is a basis or the fact that R2 is of  15:09dimension 2 and this is a orthonormal set of size  2 so it must be linearly independent, so linearly  15:19independent of size 2, which  tells you it is a basis.  15:24So, maybe let me just write that again here, since  it got lost out. So, here I was just saying that  15:32vi,vj is 0 implies vi, norm vi, vj divided by norm  vj. So, this is 1 by norm vi times norm vj times  15:49the inner product of vi,vj, which is 0. So, from  here, we get that the existing set is orthogonal,  16:00sorry, the new set is orthogonal. And norm of vi by norm vi  16:07we can take the norm out. So, this gives us 1.  16:17So, that is what, that is why this  statement holds true. And the example  16:26tells you, if you do not understand what I have  written here, tells you why these things work. So,  16:31work out the example for yourself. So, why are orthonormal bases important?  16:36This is a sort of the punch line of what we are  doing. So, suppose gamma is v1, v2, vn and this is  16:43an orthonormal basis of an inner product space V  and suppose you have a vector v inside capital V.  16:53Well, we already know because it is a basis  that you can write little v as c1v1 plus c2v2  16:58plus cnvn. Why is that, because remember that a  basis is in particular a spanning set, a basis  17:05is a spanning set, which means every vector is  a linear combination of the basis vectors.  17:13And in fact, for a basis, it is a unique linear  combination. So, there are a unique c1, c2, cn  17:19such that little v c1v1 plus c2v2 plus cnvn. So,  this is a general statement for any basis. Now,  17:26what is the importance of it, being an inner  product space and with an orthonormal basis?  17:32So, how do we find c1, c2, cn,  for any basis this means writing  17:36a system of linear equations and solving. So, that is how I typically solve for c1, c2,  17:41cn. You write your v and then you write your  v1, v2, vn and then you solve these equations.  17:48But since gamma is orthonormal, we can  use the inner product and compute ci is v,  17:55inner product of v, vi. So, how do I do that?  Let me quickly show you why that is true.  18:02So, let us compute what is inner product of v,vi.  So, if you compute what is inner product of v,vi,  18:08I substitute c1v1 plus c2v2 plus civi plus cnvn  and then inner product with respect with vi, well,  18:23we know that the inner product is a linear in each  variable, which means that I can write this as  18:31c1 times inner product of v1,vi plus c2 times  inner product of v1 v2,vi, all the way up to,  18:42then we have plus ci times  inner product of vi,vi plus  18:53cn inner product of vn,vi. This is what we get.  18:59But now, we know that this is an orthonormal  basis. So, because it is an orthonormal basis,  19:06first of all, it is orthogonal. So, other than the  vi,vi term, every other term is going to be 0. So,  19:12this term will remain and all these terms are 0.  So, this is, I can just write this as ci times  19:21vi,vi. So, this, we have used here that  it is orthogonal, but now we also know  19:26it is orthonormal, because it is orthonormal  this is, we can rewrite this as ci times norm  19:33vi squared, and norm vi we know is 1. So, this is just ci. This is where we are  19:39using the fact that we have an orthonormal  basis. So, what did we get? We got that  19:43the inner product of v and vi is equal to ci.  So, this is a very easy way of saying what  19:52are the coefficients which come into this linear  combination, which gives you v. How do we find c1,  19:58c2, cn, the answer is each ci is take the inner  product of v with vi and that is your ci.  20:04Let us do an example. We saw this  orthonormal basis for R2 earlier.  20:08So, write 2,5 as a linear combination in terms  of these basis vectors. So, if you take 2,5  20:17let us write this as c1 times 1 by root 10  1,3 plus c2 times 1 by root 10 minus 3,1.  20:28Well, we just saw, what is c1.  c1 is the inner product of v,v1.  20:41So, here v1 is 1 by root 10 times 1,3, which is,  you can pull out the constant, so 1 by root 10  20:49and then the remaining things, take the inner  product, so this is 2 times 1 plus 5 times 3.  20:56So, what does that give us, 1 by root 10 times  21:012 plus 15, so that is 17. And  then we get c2, which is v,v2,  21:14so 1 by root 10 times minus 3,1 which gives us,  21:26again, the 1 by root 10 comes out, and we get  2 times minus 3 plus 5 times 1, which is minus  21:366 plus 5, so minus 1 by root 10. So, this  is what we obtained as the coefficients.  21:52So, now, if we write 2,5, in terms of these  vectors we get 2,5 is 17 by root 10 times v1  22:06plus minus 1 by root 10 times v2, so which if  you write out completely 17 times root 10 times  22:181 by root 10 times one-third, sorry, 1,3  plus or rather minus 1 by root 10 times,  22:311 by root 10times minus 3,1. And you can check  actually that this is indeed going to work.  22:37If you want, we can do that  quickly. This is 17 by 10 1,3 minus  22:461 by 10 minus 3,1. And if you work this out, the  first entry is 17 by 10 minus minus 3 by 10. So,  22:5517 by 10 plus 3 by 10 so 20 by 10, which is giving  you 2. And then the second entry is 51 by 10 minus  23:021 by 10, which is giving you 5. So, this shows  that, indeed, what the equation we wrote down is  23:08correct. This would have been maybe slightly  harder if we did not have this knowledge that  23:14this is an orthonormal basis. So, I hope in this video you have  23:19figured out what, I mean, you have understood  the main point. The main point is that we define  23:26something called an orthonormal basis, that is  an orthogonal basis in which each vector has  23:32norm 1. And the crux of the video is that  every vector which you can write as a linear  23:41combination of the orthonormal basis, the  coefficients of, in that linear combination  23:50c1, c2, cn are essentially are equal to the inner  product of the vector v with the corresponding  24:02basis vector vi. That is the main  24:05point. So, I guess that finishes this  video. Thank you.

Please enable JavaScript to continue using this application.